SECTION 1

Part 1 

Things are said to be named 'equivocally' when, though they have
a common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs
for each. Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture can both lay
claim to the name 'animal'; yet these are equivocally so named, for,
though they have a common name, the definition corresponding with
the name differs for each. For should any one define in what sense
each is an animal, his definition in the one case will be appropriate
to that case only. 

On the other hand, things are said to be named 'univocally' which
have both the name and the definition answering to the name in common.
A man and an ox are both 'animal', and these are univocally so named,
inasmuch as not only the name, but also the definition, is the same
in both cases: for if a man should state in what sense each is an
animal, the statement in the one case would be identical with that
in the other. 

Things are said to be named 'derivatively', which derive their name
from some other name, but differ from it in termination. Thus the
grammarian derives his name from the word 'grammar', and the courageous
man from the word 'courage'. 

Part 2

Forms of speech are either simple or composite. Examples of the latter
are such expressions as 'the man runs', 'the man wins'; of the former
'man', 'ox', 'runs', 'wins'. 

Of things themselves some are predicable of a subject, and are never
present in a subject. Thus 'man' is predicable of the individual man,
and is never present in a subject. 

By being 'present in a subject' I do not mean present as parts are
present in a whole, but being incapable of existence apart from the
said subject. 

Some things, again, are present in a subject, but are never predicable
of a subject. For instance, a certain point of grammatical knowledge
is present in the mind, but is not predicable of any subject; or again,
a certain whiteness may be present in the body (for colour requires
a material basis), yet it is never predicable of anything.

Other things, again, are both predicable of a subject and present
in a subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the human mind, it
is predicable of grammar. 

There is, lastly, a class of things which are neither present in a
subject nor predicable of a subject, such as the individual man or
the individual horse. But, to speak more generally, that which is
individual and has the character of a unit is never predicable of
a subject. Yet in some cases there is nothing to prevent such being
present in a subject. Thus a certain point of grammatical knowledge
is present in a subject. 

Part 3

When one thing is predicated of another, all that which is predicable
of the predicate will be predicable also of the subject. Thus, 'man'
is predicated of the individual man; but 'animal' is predicated of
'man'; it will, therefore, be predicable of the individual man also:
for the individual man is both 'man' and 'animal'. 

If genera are different and co-ordinate, their differentiae are themselves
different in kind. Take as an instance the genus 'animal' and the
genus 'knowledge'. 'With feet', 'two-footed', 'winged', 'aquatic',
are differentiae of 'animal'; the species of knowledge are not distinguished
by the same differentiae. One species of knowledge does not differ
from another in being 'two-footed'. 

But where one genus is subordinate to another, there is nothing to
prevent their having the same differentiae: for the greater class
is predicated of the lesser, so that all the differentiae of the predicate
will be differentiae also of the subject. 

Part 4

Expressions which are in no way composite signify substance, quantity,
quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, or affection.
To sketch my meaning roughly, examples of substance are 'man' or 'the
horse', of quantity, such terms as 'two cubits long' or 'three cubits
long', of quality, such attributes as 'white', 'grammatical'. 'Double',
'half', 'greater', fall under the category of relation; 'in a the
market place', 'in the Lyceum', under that of place; 'yesterday',
'last year', under that of time. 'Lying', 'sitting', are terms indicating
position, 'shod', 'armed', state; 'to lance', 'to cauterize', action;
'to be lanced', 'to be cauterized', affection. 

No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation;
it is by the combination of such terms that positive or negative statements
arise. For every assertion must, as is admitted, be either true or
false, whereas expressions which are not in any way composite such
as 'man', 'white', 'runs', 'wins', cannot be either true or false.

Part 5

Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the
word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present
in a subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. But in a
secondary sense those things are called substances within which, as
species, the primary substances are included; also those which, as
genera, include the species. For instance, the individual man is included
in the species 'man', and the genus to which the species belongs is
'animal'; these, therefore-that is to say, the species 'man' and the
genus 'animal,-are termed secondary substances. 

It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the definition
of the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For instance,
'man' is predicted of the individual man. Now in this case the name
of the species man' is applied to the individual, for we use the term
'man' in describing the individual; and the definition of 'man' will
also be predicated of the individual man, for the individual man is
both man and animal. Thus, both the name and the definition of the
species are predicable of the individual. 

With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are present
in a subject, it is generally the case that neither their name nor
their definition is predicable of that in which they are present.
Though, however, the definition is never predicable, there is nothing
in certain cases to prevent the name being used. For instance, 'white'
being present in a body is predicated of that in which it is present,
for a body is called white: the definition, however, of the colour
white' is never predicable of the body. 

Everything except primary substances is either predicable of a primary
substance or present in a primary substance. This becomes evident
by reference to particular instances which occur. 'Animal' is predicated
of the species 'man', therefore of the individual man, for if there
were no individual man of whom it could be predicated, it could not
be predicated of the species 'man' at all. Again, colour is present
in body, therefore in individual bodies, for if there were no individual
body in which it was present, it could not be present in body at all.
Thus everything except primary substances is either predicated of
primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did not
exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist.

Of secondary substances, the species is more truly substance than
the genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. For if
any one should render an account of what a primary substance is, he
would render a more instructive account, and one more proper to the
subject, by stating the species than by stating the genus. Thus, he
would give a more instructive account of an individual man by stating
that he was man than by stating that he was animal, for the former
description is peculiar to the individual in a greater degree, while
the latter is too general. Again, the man who gives an account of
the nature of an individual tree will give a more instructive account
by mentioning the species 'tree' than by mentioning the genus 'plant'.

Moreover, primary substances are most properly called substances in
virtue of the fact that they are the entities which underlie every.
else, and that everything else is either predicated of them or present
in them. Now the same relation which subsists between primary substance
and everything else subsists also between the species and the genus:
for the species is to the genus as subject is to predicate, since
the genus is predicated of the species, whereas the species cannot
be predicated of the genus. Thus we have a second ground for asserting
that the species is more truly substance than the genus.

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera, no
one is more truly substance than another. We should not give a more
appropriate account of the individual man by stating the species to
which he belonged, than we should of an individual horse by adopting
the same method of definition. In the same way, of primary substances,
no one is more truly substance than another; an individual man is
not more truly substance than an individual ox. 

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we exclude
primary substances, we concede to species and genera alone the name
'secondary substance', for these alone of all the predicates convey
a knowledge of primary substance. For it is by stating the species
or the genus that we appropriately define any individual man; and
we shall make our definition more exact by stating the former than
by stating the latter. All other things that we state, such as that
he is white, that he runs, and so on, are irrelevant to the definition.
Thus it is just that these alone, apart from primary substances, should
be called substances. 

Further, primary substances are most properly so called, because they
underlie and are the subjects of everything else. Now the same relation
that subsists between primary substance and everything else subsists
also between the species and the genus to which the primary substance
belongs, on the one hand, and every attribute which is not included
within these, on the other. For these are the subjects of all such.
If we call an individual man 'skilled in grammar', the predicate is
applicable also to the species and to the genus to which he belongs.
This law holds good in all cases. 

It is a common characteristic of all sub. stance that it is never
present in a subject. For primary substance is neither present in
a subject nor predicated of a subject; while, with regard to secondary
substances, it is clear from the following arguments (apart from others)
that they are not present in a subject. For 'man' is predicated of
the individual man, but is not present in any subject: for manhood
is not present in the individual man. In the same way, 'animal' is
also predicated of the individual man, but is not present in him.
Again, when a thing is present in a subject, though the name may quite
well be applied to that in which it is present, the definition cannot
be applied. Yet of secondary substances, not only the name, but also
the definition, applies to the subject: we should use both the definition
of the species and that of the genus with reference to the individual
man. Thus substance cannot be present in a subject. 

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case that
differentiae cannot be present in subjects. The characteristics 'terrestrial'
and 'two-footed' are predicated of the species 'man', but not present
in it. For they are not in man. Moreover, the definition of the differentia
may be predicated of that of which the differentia itself is predicated.
For instance, if the characteristic 'terrestrial' is predicated of
the species 'man', the definition also of that characteristic may
be used to form the predicate of the species 'man': for 'man' is terrestrial.

The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the
whole, as in a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we should
have to admit that such parts are not substances: for in explaining
the phrase 'being present in a subject', we stated' that we meant
'otherwise than as parts in a whole'. 

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all propositions
of which they form the predicate, they are predicated univocally.
For all such propositions have for their subject either the individual
or the species. It is true that, inasmuch as primary substance is
not predicable of anything, it can never form the predicate of any
proposition. But of secondary substances, the species is predicated
of the individual, the genus both of the species and of the individual.
Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the species and of the
individuals. Moreover, the definition of the species and that of the
genus are applicable to the primary substance, and that of the genus
to the species. For all that is predicated of the predicate will be
predicated also of the subject. Similarly, the definition of the differentiae
will be applicable to the species and to the individuals. But it was
stated above that the word 'univocal' was applied to those things
which had both name and definition in common. It is, therefore, established
that in every proposition, of which either substance or a differentia
forms the predicate, these are predicated univocally. 

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the
case of primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing
is a unit. In the case of secondary substances, when we speak, for
instance, of 'man' or 'animal', our form of speech gives the impression
that we are here also indicating that which is individual, but the
impression is not strictly true; for a secondary substance is not
an individual, but a class with a certain qualification; for it is
not one and single as a primary substance is; the words 'man', 'animal',
are predicable of more than one subject. 

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the term
'white'; 'white' indicates quality and nothing further, but species
and genus determine the quality with reference to a substance: they
signify substance qualitatively differentiated. The determinate qualification
covers a larger field in the case of the genus that in that of the
species: he who uses the word 'animal' is herein using a word of wider
extension than he who uses the word 'man'. 

Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What could be
the contrary of any primary substance, such as the individual man
or animal? It has none. Nor can the species or the genus have a contrary.
Yet this characteristic is not peculiar to substance, but is true
of many other things, such as quantity. There is nothing that forms
the contrary of 'two cubits long' or of 'three cubits long', or of
'ten', or of any such term. A man may contend that 'much' is the contrary
of 'little', or 'great' of 'small', but of definite quantitative terms
no contrary exists. 

Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of degree.
I do not mean by this that one substance cannot be more or less truly
substance than another, for it has already been stated' that this
is the case; but that no single substance admits of varying degrees
within itself. For instance, one particular substance, 'man', cannot
be more or less man either than himself at some other time or than
some other man. One man cannot be more man than another, as that which
is white may be more or less white than some other white object, or
as that which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than some
other beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist
in a thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, being white,
is said to be whiter at one time than it was before, or, being warm,
is said to be warmer or less warm than at some other time. But substance
is not said to be more or less that which it is: a man is not more
truly a man at one time than he was before, nor is anything, if it
is substance, more or less what it is. Substance, then, does not admit
of variation of degree. 

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, while remaining
numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary
qualities. From among things other than substance, we should find
ourselves unable to bring forward any which possessed this mark. Thus,
one and the same colour cannot be white and black. Nor can the same
one action be good and bad: this law holds good with everything that
is not substance. But one and the selfsame substance, while retaining
its identity, is yet capable of admitting contrary qualities. The
same individual person is at one time white, at another black, at
one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another bad.
This capacity is found nowhere else, though it might be maintained
that a statement or opinion was an exception to the rule. The same
statement, it is agreed, can be both true and false. For if the statement
'he is sitting' is true, yet, when the person in question has risen,
the same statement will be false. The same applies to opinions. For
if any one thinks truly that a person is sitting, yet, when that person
has risen, this same opinion, if still held, will be false. Yet although
this exception may be allowed, there is, nevertheless, a difference
in the manner in which the thing takes place. It is by themselves
changing that substances admit contrary qualities. It is thus that
that which was hot becomes cold, for it has entered into a different
state. Similarly that which was white becomes black, and that which
was bad good, by a process of change; and in the same way in all other
cases it is by changing that substances are capable of admitting contrary
qualities. But statements and opinions themselves remain unaltered
in all respects: it is by the alteration in the facts of the case
that the contrary quality comes to be theirs. The statement 'he is
sitting' remains unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another
false, according to circumstances. What has been said of statements
applies also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which
the thing takes place, it is the peculiar mark of substance that it
should be capable of admitting contrary qualities; for it is by itself
changing that it does so. 

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that statements
and opinions are capable of admitting contrary qualities, his contention
is unsound. For statements and opinions are said to have this capacity,
not because they themselves undergo modification, but because this
modification occurs in the case of something else. The truth or falsity
of a statement depends on facts, and not on any power on the part
of the statement itself of admitting contrary qualities. In short,
there is nothing which can alter the nature of statements and opinions.
As, then, no change takes place in themselves, these cannot be said
to be capable of admitting contrary qualities. 

But it is by reason of the modification which takes place within the
substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of admitting
contrary qualities; for a substance admits within itself either disease
or health, whiteness or blackness. It is in this sense that it is
said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities. 

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while remaining
numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary
qualities, the modification taking place through a change in the substance
itself. 

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance. 

Part 6

Quantity is either discrete or continuous. Moreover, some quantities
are such that each part of the whole has a relative position to the
other parts: others have within them no such relation of part to part.

Instances of discrete quantities are number and speech; of continuous,
lines, surfaces, solids, and, besides these, time and place.

In the case of the parts of a number, there is no common boundary
at which they join. For example: two fives make ten, but the two fives
have no common boundary, but are separate; the parts three and seven
also do not join at any boundary. Nor, to generalize, would it ever
be possible in the case of number that there should be a common boundary
among the parts; they are always separate. Number, therefore, is a
discrete quantity. 

The same is true of speech. That speech is a quantity is evident:
for it is measured in long and short syllables. I mean here that speech
which is vocal. Moreover, it is a discrete quantity for its parts
have no common boundary. There is no common boundary at which the
syllables join, but each is separate and distinct from the rest.

A line, on the other hand, is a continuous quantity, for it is possible
to find a common boundary at which its parts join. In the case of
the line, this common boundary is the point; in the case of the plane,
it is the line: for the parts of the plane have also a common boundary.
Similarly you can find a common boundary in the case of the parts
of a solid, namely either a line or a plane. 

Space and time also belong to this class of quantities. Time, past,
present, and future, forms a continuous whole. Space, likewise, is
a continuous quantity; for the parts of a solid occupy a certain space,
and these have a common boundary; it follows that the parts of space
also, which are occupied by the parts of the solid, have the same
common boundary as the parts of the solid. Thus, not only time, but
space also, is a continuous quantity, for its parts have a common
boundary. 

Quantities consist either of parts which bear a relative position
each to each, or of parts which do not. The parts of a line bear a
relative position to each other, for each lies somewhere, and it would
be possible to distinguish each, and to state the position of each
on the plane and to explain to what sort of part among the rest each
was contiguous. Similarly the parts of a plane have position, for
it could similarly be stated what was the position of each and what
sort of parts were contiguous. The same is true with regard to the
solid and to space. But it would be impossible to show that the arts
of a number had a relative position each to each, or a particular
position, or to state what parts were contiguous. Nor could this be
done in the case of time, for none of the parts of time has an abiding
existence, and that which does not abide can hardly have position.
It would be better to say that such parts had a relative order, in
virtue of one being prior to another. Similarly with number: in counting,
'one' is prior to 'two', and 'two' to 'three', and thus the parts
of number may be said to possess a relative order, though it would
be impossible to discover any distinct position for each. This holds
good also in the case of speech. None of its parts has an abiding
existence: when once a syllable is pronounced, it is not possible
to retain it, so that, naturally, as the parts do not abide, they
cannot have position. Thus, some quantities consist of parts which
have position, and some of those which have not. 

Strictly speaking, only the things which I have mentioned belong to
the category of quantity: everything else that is called quantitative
is a quantity in a secondary sense. It is because we have in mind
some one of these quantities, properly so called, that we apply quantitative
terms to other things. We speak of what is white as large, because
the surface over which the white extends is large; we speak of an
action or a process as lengthy, because the time covered is long;
these things cannot in their own right claim the quantitative epithet.
For instance, should any one explain how long an action was, his statement
would be made in terms of the time taken, to the effect that it lasted
a year, or something of that sort. In the same way, he would explain
the size of a white object in terms of surface, for he would state
the area which it covered. Thus the things already mentioned, and
these alone, are in their intrinsic nature quantities; nothing else
can claim the name in its own right, but, if at all, only in a secondary
sense. 

Quantities have no contraries. In the case of definite quantities
this is obvious; thus, there is nothing that is the contrary of 'two
cubits long' or of 'three cubits long', or of a surface, or of any
such quantities. A man might, indeed, argue that 'much' was the contrary
of 'little', and 'great' of 'small'. But these are not quantitative,
but relative; things are not great or small absolutely, they are so
called rather as the result of an act of comparison. For instance,
a mountain is called small, a grain large, in virtue of the fact that
the latter is greater than others of its kind, the former less. Thus
there is a reference here to an external standard, for if the terms
'great' and 'small' were used absolutely, a mountain would never be
called small or a grain large. Again, we say that there are many people
in a village, and few in Athens, although those in the city are many
times as numerous as those in the village: or we say that a house
has many in it, and a theatre few, though those in the theatre far
outnumber those in the house. The terms 'two cubits long, "three cubits
long,' and so on indicate quantity, the terms 'great' and 'small'
indicate relation, for they have reference to an external standard.
It is, therefore, plain that these are to be classed as relative.

Again, whether we define them as quantitative or not, they have no
contraries: for how can there be a contrary of an attribute which
is not to be apprehended in or by itself, but only by reference to
something external? Again, if 'great' and 'small' are contraries,
it will come about that the same subject can admit contrary qualities
at one and the same time, and that things will themselves be contrary
to themselves. For it happens at times that the same thing is both
small and great. For the same thing may be small in comparison with
one thing, and great in comparison with another, so that the same
thing comes to be both small and great at one and the same time, and
is of such a nature as to admit contrary qualities at one and the
same moment. Yet it was agreed, when substance was being discussed,
that nothing admits contrary qualities at one and the same moment.
For though substance is capable of admitting contrary qualities, yet
no one is at the same time both sick and healthy, nothing is at the
same time both white and black. Nor is there anything which is qualified
in contrary ways at one and the same time. 

Moreover, if these were contraries, they would themselves be contrary
to themselves. For if 'great' is the contrary of 'small', and the
same thing is both great and small at the same time, then 'small'
or 'great' is the contrary of itself. But this is impossible. The
term 'great', therefore, is not the contrary of the term 'small',
nor 'much' of 'little'. And even though a man should call these terms
not relative but quantitative, they would not have contraries.

It is in the case of space that quantity most plausibly appears to
admit of a contrary. For men define the term 'above' as the contrary
of 'below', when it is the region at the centre they mean by 'below';
and this is so, because nothing is farther from the extremities of
the universe than the region at the centre. Indeed, it seems that
in defining contraries of every kind men have recourse to a spatial
metaphor, for they say that those things are contraries which, within
the same class, are separated by the greatest possible distance.

Quantity does not, it appears, admit of variation of degree. One thing
cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than another. Similarly
with regard to number: what is 'three' is not more truly three than
what is 'five' is five; nor is one set of three more truly three than
another set. Again, one period of time is not said to be more truly
time than another. Nor is there any other kind of quantity, of all
that have been mentioned, with regard to which variation of degree
can be predicated. The category of quantity, therefore, does not admit
of variation of degree. 

The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and inequality
are predicated of it. Each of the aforesaid quantities is said to
be equal or unequal. For instance, one solid is said to be equal or
unequal to another; number, too, and time can have these terms applied
to them, indeed can all those kinds of quantity that have been mentioned.

That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, be termed
equal or unequal to anything else. One particular disposition or one
particular quality, such as whiteness, is by no means compared with
another in terms of equality and inequality but rather in terms of
similarity. Thus it is the distinctive mark of quantity that it can
be called equal and unequal. 

SECTION 2

Part 7 

Those things are called relative, which, being either said to be
of something else or related to something else, are explained by reference
to that other thing. For instance, the word 'superior' is explained
by reference to something else, for it is superiority over something
else that is meant. Similarly, the expression 'double' has this external
reference, for it is the double of something else that is meant. So
it is with everything else of this kind. There are, moreover, other
relatives, e.g. habit, disposition, perception, knowledge, and attitude.
The significance of all these is explained by a reference to something
else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is a habit of something, knowledge
is knowledge of something, attitude is the attitude of something.
So it is with all other relatives that have been mentioned. Those
terms, then, are called relative, the nature of which is explained
by reference to something else, the preposition 'of' or some other
preposition being used to indicate the relation. Thus, one mountain
is called great in comparison with son with another; for the mountain
claims this attribute by comparison with something. Again, that which
is called similar must be similar to something else, and all other
such attributes have this external reference. It is to be noted that
lying and standing and sitting are particular attitudes, but attitude
is itself a relative term. To lie, to stand, to be seated, are not
themselves attitudes, but take their name from the aforesaid attitudes.

It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus virtue has a
contrary, vice, these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a
contrary, ignorance. But this is not the mark of all relatives; 'double'
and 'triple' have no contrary, nor indeed has any such term.

It also appears that relatives can admit of variation of degree. For
'like' and 'unlike', 'equal' and 'unequal', have the modifications
'more' and 'less' applied to them, and each of these is relative in
character: for the terms 'like' and 'unequal' bear 'unequal' bear
a reference to something external. Yet, again, it is not every relative
term that admits of variation of degree. No term such as 'double'
admits of this modification. All relatives have correlatives: by the
term 'slave' we mean the slave of a master, by the term 'master',
the master of a slave; by 'double', the double of its hall; by 'half',
the half of its double; by 'greater', greater than that which is less;
by 'less,' less than that which is greater. 

So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to express
the correlation differs in some instances. Thus, by knowledge we mean
knowledge the knowable; by the knowable, that which is to be apprehended
by knowledge; by perception, perception of the perceptible; by the
perceptible, that which is apprehended by perception. 

Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear to
exist. This comes about when a blunder is made, and that to which
the relative is related is not accurately stated. If a man states
that a wing is necessarily relative to a bird, the connexion between
these two will not be reciprocal, for it will not be possible to say
that a bird is a bird by reason of its wings. The reason is that the
original statement was inaccurate, for the wing is not said to be
relative to the bird qua bird, since many creatures besides birds
have wings, but qua winged creature. If, then, the statement is made
accurate, the connexion will be reciprocal, for we can speak of a
wing, having reference necessarily to a winged creature, and of a
winged creature as being such because of its wings. 

Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words, if no word exists
by which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we define a
rudder as necessarily having reference to a boat, our definition will
not be appropriate, for the rudder does not have this reference to
a boat qua boat, as there are boats which have no rudders. Thus we
cannot use the terms reciprocally, for the word 'boat' cannot be said
to find its explanation in the word 'rudder'. As there is no existing
word, our definition would perhaps be more accurate if we coined some
word like 'ruddered' as the correlative of 'rudder'. If we express
ourselves thus accurately, at any rate the terms are reciprocally
connected, for the 'ruddered' thing is 'ruddered' in virtue of its
rudder. So it is in all other cases. A head will be more accurately
defined as the correlative of that which is 'headed', than as that
of an animal, for the animal does not have a head qua animal, since
many animals have no head. 

Thus we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a thing is
related, when a name does not exist, if, from that which has a name,
we derive a new name, and apply it to that with which the first is
reciprocally connected, as in the aforesaid instances, when we derived
the word 'winged' from 'wing' and from 'rudder'. 

All relatives, then, if properly defined, have a correlative. I add
this condition because, if that to which they are related is stated
as haphazard and not accurately, the two are not found to be interdependent.
Let me state what I mean more clearly. Even in the case of acknowledged
correlatives, and where names exist for each, there will be no interdependence
if one of the two is denoted, not by that name which expresses the
correlative notion, but by one of irrelevant significance. The term
'slave,' if defined as related, not to a master, but to a man, or
a biped, or anything of that sort, is not reciprocally connected with
that in relation to which it is defined, for the statement is not
exact. Further, if one thing is said to be correlative with another,
and the terminology used is correct, then, though all irrelevant attributes
should be removed, and only that one attribute left in virtue of which
it was correctly stated to be correlative with that other, the stated
correlation will still exist. If the correlative of 'the slave' is
said to be 'the master', then, though all irrelevant attributes of
the said 'master', such as 'biped', 'receptive of knowledge', 'human',
should be removed, and the attribute 'master' alone left, the stated
correlation existing between him and the slave will remain the same,
for it is of a master that a slave is said to be the slave. On the
other hand, if, of two correlatives, one is not correctly termed,
then, when all other attributes are removed and that alone is left
in virtue of which it was stated to be correlative, the stated correlation
will be found to have disappeared. 

For suppose the correlative of 'the slave' should be said to be 'the
man', or the correlative of 'the wing"the bird'; if the attribute
'master' be withdrawn from' the man', the correlation between 'the
man' and 'the slave' will cease to exist, for if the man is not a
master, the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if the attribute 'winged'
be withdrawn from 'the bird', 'the wing' will no longer be relative;
for if the so-called correlative is not winged, it follows that 'the
wing' has no correlative. 

Thus it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly designated;
if there is a name existing, the statement will be easy; if not, it
is doubtless our duty to construct names. When the terminology is
thus correct, it is evident that all correlatives are interdependent.

Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. This
is for the most part true, as in the case of the double and the half.
The existence of the half necessitates the existence of that of which
it is a half. Similarly the existence of a master necessitates the
existence of a slave, and that of a slave implies that of a master;
these are merely instances of a general rule. Moreover, they cancel
one another; for if there is no double it follows that there is no
half, and vice versa; this rule also applies to all such correlatives.
Yet it does not appear to be true in all cases that correlatives come
into existence simultaneously. The object of knowledge would appear
to exist before knowledge itself, for it is usually the case that
we acquire knowledge of objects already existing; it would be difficult,
if not impossible, to find a branch of knowledge the beginning of
the existence of which was contemporaneous with that of its object.

Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, cancels
at the same time the knowledge which was its correlative, the converse
of this is not true. It is true that if the object of knowledge does
not exist there can be no knowledge: for there will no longer be anything
to know. Yet it is equally true that, if knowledge of a certain object
does not exist, the object may nevertheless quite well exist. Thus,
in the case of the squaring of the circle, if indeed that process
is an object of knowledge, though it itself exists as an object of
knowledge, yet the knowledge of it has not yet come into existence.
Again, if all animals ceased to exist, there would be no knowledge,
but there might yet be many objects of knowledge. 

This is likewise the case with regard to perception: for the object
of perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception. If the
perceptible is annihilated, perception also will cease to exist; but
the annihilation of perception does not cancel the existence of the
perceptible. For perception implies a body perceived and a body in
which perception takes place. Now if that which is perceptible is
annihilated, it follows that the body is annihilated, for the body
is a perceptible thing; and if the body does not exist, it follows
that perception also ceases to exist. Thus the annihilation of the
perceptible involves that of perception. 

But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the perceptible.
For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that perception also
is annihilated, but perceptibles such as body, heat, sweetness, bitterness,
and so on, will remain. 

Again, perception is generated at the same time as the perceiving
subject, for it comes into existence at the same time as the animal.
But the perceptible surely exists before perception; for fire and
water and such elements, out of which the animal is itself composed,
exist before the animal is an animal at all, and before perception.
Thus it would seem that the perceptible exists before perception.

It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is relative,
as seems to be the case, or whether exception is to be made in the
case of certain secondary substances. With regard to primary substances,
it is quite true that there is no such possibility, for neither wholes
nor parts of primary substances are relative. The individual man or
ox is not defined with reference to something external. Similarly
with the parts: a particular hand or head is not defined as a particular
hand or head of a particular person, but as the hand or head of a
particular person. It is true also, for the most part at least, in
the case of secondary substances; the species 'man' and the species
'ox' are not defined with reference to anything outside themselves.
Wood, again, is only relative in so far as it is some one's property,
not in so far as it is wood. It is plain, then, that in the cases
mentioned substance is not relative. But with regard to some secondary
substances there is a difference of opinion; thus, such terms as 'head'
and 'hand' are defined with reference to that of which the things
indicated are a part, and so it comes about that these appear to have
a relative character. Indeed, if our definition of that which is relative
was complete, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to prove that
no substance is relative. If, however, our definition was not complete,
if those things only are properly called relative in the case of which
relation to an external object is a necessary condition of existence,
perhaps some explanation of the dilemma may be found. 

The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the
fact that a thing is explained with reference to something else does
not make it essentially relative. 

From this it is plain that, if a man definitely apprehends a relative
thing, he will also definitely apprehend that to which it is relative.
Indeed this is self-evident: for if a man knows that some particular
thing is relative, assuming that we call that a relative in the case
of which relation to something is a necessary condition of existence,
he knows that also to which it is related. For if he does not know
at all that to which it is related, he will not know whether or not
it is relative. This is clear, moreover, in particular instances.
If a man knows definitely that such and such a thing is 'double',
he will also forthwith know definitely that of which it is the double.
For if there is nothing definite of which he knows it to be the double,
he does not know at all that it is double. Again, if he knows that
a thing is more beautiful, it follows necessarily that he will forthwith
definitely know that also than which it is more beautiful. He will
not merely know indefinitely that it is more beautiful than something
which is less beautiful, for this would be supposition, not knowledge.
For if he does not know definitely that than which it is more beautiful,
he can no longer claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful
than something else which is less beautiful: for it might be that
nothing was less beautiful. It is, therefore, evident that if a man
apprehends some relative thing definitely, he necessarily knows that
also definitely to which it is related. 

Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it is
possible to know their essential character definitely, but it does
not necessarily follow that we should know that to which they are
related. It is not possible to know forthwith whose head or hand is
meant. Thus these are not relatives, and, this being the case, it
would be true to say that no substance is relative in character. It
is perhaps a difficult matter, in such cases, to make a positive statement
without more exhaustive examination, but to have raised questions
with regard to details is not without advantage. 

Part 8

By 'quality' I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be
such and such. 

Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality
let us call 'habit' or 'disposition'. Habit differs from disposition
in being more lasting and more firmly established. The various kinds
of knowledge and of virtue are habits, for knowledge, even when acquired
only in a moderate degree, is, it is agreed, abiding in its character
and difficult to displace, unless some great mental upheaval takes
place, through disease or any such cause. The virtues, also, such
as justice, self-restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged or
dismissed, so as to give place to vice. 

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is easily
changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat, cold,
disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man is disposed
in one way or another with reference to these, but quickly changes,
becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of well. So it is with
all other dispositions also, unless through lapse of time a disposition
has itself become inveterate and almost impossible to dislodge: in
which case we should perhaps go so far as to call it a habit.

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which
are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for
those who are not retentive of knowledge, but volatile, are not said
to have such and such a 'habit' as regards knowledge, yet they are
disposed, we may say, either better or worse, towards knowledge. Thus
habit differs from disposition in this, that while the latter in ephemeral,
the former is permanent and difficult to alter. 

Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are not
necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be
said also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but
those who are disposed in some specific way have not in all cases
the corresponding habit. 

Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, we
call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact it
includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity.
Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue of his disposition,
but in virtue of his inborn capacity or incapacity to do something
with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons are called good
boxers or good runners, not in virtue of such and such a disposition,
but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish something with ease.
Men are called healthy in virtue of the inborn capacity of easy resistance
to those unhealthy influences that may ordinarily arise; unhealthy,
in virtue of the lack of this capacity. Similarly with regard to softness
and hardness. Hardness is predicated of a thing because it has that
capacity of resistance which enables it to withstand disintegration;
softness, again, is predicated of a thing by reason of the lack of
that capacity. 

A third class within this category is that of affective qualities
and affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of this
sort of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat, moreover,
and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective qualities. It is
evident that these are qualities, for those things that possess them
are themselves said to be such and such by reason of their presence.
Honey is called sweet because it contains sweetness; the body is called
white because it contains whiteness; and so in all other cases.

The term 'affective quality' is not used as indicating that those
things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. Honey
is not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor
is this what is meant in any other instance. Similarly heat and cold
are called affective qualities, not because those things which admit
them are affected. What is meant is that these said qualities are
capable of producing an 'affection' in the way of perception. For
sweetness has the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat, that
of touch; and so it is with the rest of these qualities.

Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are not said
to be affective qualities in this sense, but -because they themselves
are the results of an affection. It is plain that many changes of
colour take place because of affections. When a man is ashamed, he
blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes pale, and so on. So true is
this, that when a man is by nature liable to such affections, arising
from some concomitance of elements in his constitution, it is a probable
inference that he has the corresponding complexion of skin. For the
same disposition of bodily elements, which in the former instance
was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame, might be
a result of a man's natural temperament, so as to produce the corresponding
colouring also as a natural characteristic. All conditions, therefore,
of this kind, if caused by certain permanent and lasting affections,
are called affective qualities. For pallor and duskiness of complexion
are called qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such
in virtue of them, not only if they originate in natural constitution,
but also if they come about through long disease or sunburn, and are
difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout life. For in the
same way we are said to be such and such because of these.

Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may easily
be rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called, not qualities,
but affections: for we are not said to be such virtue of them. The
man who blushes through shame is not said to be a constitutional blusher,
nor is the man who becomes pale through fear said to be constitutionally
pale. He is said rather to have been affected. 

Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities.

In like manner there are affective qualities and affections of the
soul. That temper with which a man is born and which has its origin
in certain deep-seated affections is called a quality. I mean such
conditions as insanity, irascibility, and so on: for people are said
to be mad or irascible in virtue of these. Similarly those abnormal
psychic states which are not inborn, but arise from the concomitance
of certain other elements, and are difficult to remove, or altogether
permanent, are called qualities, for in virtue of them men are said
to be such and such. 

Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered ineffective
are called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man is irritable
when vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered man, when in
such circumstances he loses his temper somewhat, but rather is said
to be affected. Such conditions are therefore termed, not qualities,
but affections. 

The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to
a thing; and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any other
qualities of this type; each of these defines a thing as being such
and such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular a thing is said
to have a specific character, or again because it is straight or curved;
in fact a thing's shape in every case gives rise to a qualification
of it. 

Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be terms indicating
quality: yet these, it would appear, really belong to a class different
from that of quality. For it is rather a certain relative position
of the parts composing the thing thus qualified which, it appears,
is indicated by each of these terms. A thing is dense, owing to the
fact that its parts are closely combined with one another; rare, because
there are interstices between the parts; smooth, because its parts
lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because some parts project beyond
others. 

There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most properly
so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated. 

These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name from
them as derivatives, or are in some other way dependent on them, are
said to be qualified in some specific way. In most, indeed in almost
all cases, the name of that which is qualified is derived from that
of the quality. Thus the terms 'whiteness', 'grammar', 'justice',
give us the adjectives 'white', 'grammatical', 'just', and so on.

There are some cases, however, in which, as the quality under consideration
has no name, it is impossible that those possessed of it should have
a name that is derivative. For instance, the name given to the runner
or boxer, who is so called in virtue of an inborn capacity, is not
derived from that of any quality; for lob those capacities have no
name assigned to them. In this, the inborn capacity is distinct from
the science, with reference to which men are called, e.g. boxers or
wrestlers. Such a science is classed as a disposition; it has a name,
and is called 'boxing' or 'wrestling' as the case may be, and the
name given to those disposed in this way is derived from that of the
science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the quality, that
which takes its character from the quality has a name that is not
a derivative. For instance, the upright man takes his character from
the possession of the quality of integrity, but the name given him
is not derived from the word 'integrity'. Yet this does not occur
often. 

We may therefore state that those things are said to be possessed
of some specific quality which have a name derived from that of the
aforesaid quality, or which are in some other way dependent on it.

One quality may be the contrary of another; thus justice is the contrary
of injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The things, also,
which are said to be such and such in virtue of these qualities, may
be contrary the one to the other; for that which is unjust is contrary
to that which is just, that which is white to that which is black.
This, however, is not always the case. Red, yellow, and such colours,
though qualities, have no contraries. 

If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a quality.
This will be evident from particular instances, if we apply the names
used to denote the other categories; for instance, granted that justice
is the contrary of injustice and justice is a quality, injustice will
also be a quality: neither quantity, nor relation, nor place, nor
indeed any other category but that of quality, will be applicable
properly to injustice. So it is with all other contraries falling
under the category of quality. 

Qualities admit of variation of degree. Whiteness is predicated of
one thing in a greater or less degree than of another. This is also
the case with reference to justice. Moreover, one and the same thing
may exhibit a quality in a greater degree than it did before: if a
thing is white, it may become whiter. 

Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we
should say that justice admitted of variation of degree, difficulties
might ensue, and this is true with regard to all those qualities which
are dispositions. There are some, indeed, who dispute the possibility
of variation here. They maintain that justice and health cannot very
well admit of variation of degree themselves, but that people vary
in the degree in which they possess these qualities, and that this
is the case with grammatical learning and all those qualities which
are classed as dispositions. However that may be, it is an incontrovertible
fact that the things which in virtue of these qualities are said to
be what they are vary in the degree in which they possess them; for
one man is said to be better versed in grammar, or more healthy or
just, than another, and so on. 

The qualities expressed by the terms 'triangular' and 'quadrangular'
do not appear to admit of variation of degree, nor indeed do any that
have to do with figure. For those things to which the definition of
the triangle or circle is applicable are all equally triangular or
circular. Those, on the other hand, to which the same definition is
not applicable, cannot be said to differ from one another in degree;
the square is no more a circle than the rectangle, for to neither
is the definition of the circle appropriate. In short, if the definition
of the term proposed is not applicable to both objects, they cannot
be compared. Thus it is not all qualities which admit of variation
of degree. 

Whereas none of the characteristics I have mentioned are peculiar
to quality, the fact that likeness and unlikeness can be predicated
with reference to quality only, gives to that category its distinctive
feature. One thing is like another only with reference to that in
virtue of which it is such and such; thus this forms the peculiar
mark of quality. 

We must not be disturbed because it may be argued that, though proposing
to discuss the category of quality, we have included in it many relative
terms. We did say that habits and dispositions were relative. In practically
all such cases the genus is relative, the individual not. Thus knowledge,
as a genus, is explained by reference to something else, for we mean
a knowledge of something. But particular branches of knowledge are
not thus explained. The knowledge of grammar is not relative to anything
external, nor is the knowledge of music, but these, if relative at
all, are relative only in virtue of their genera; thus grammar is
said be the knowledge of something, not the grammar of something;
similarly music is the knowledge of something, not the music of something.

Thus individual branches of knowledge are not relative. And it is
because we possess these individual branches of knowledge that we
are said to be such and such. It is these that we actually possess:
we are called experts because we possess knowledge in some particular
branch. Those particular branches, therefore, of knowledge, in virtue
of which we are sometimes said to be such and such, are themselves
qualities, and are not relative. Further, if anything should happen
to fall within both the category of quality and that of relation,
there would be nothing extraordinary in classing it under both these
heads. 

SECTION 3

Part 9 

Action and affection both admit of contraries and also of variation
of degree. Heating is the contrary of cooling, being heated of being
cooled, being glad of being vexed. Thus they admit of contraries.
They also admit of variation of degree: for it is possible to heat
in a greater or less degree; also to be heated in a greater or less
degree. Thus action and affection also admit of variation of degree.
So much, then, is stated with regard to these categories.

We spoke, moreover, of the category of position when we were dealing
with that of relation, and stated that such terms derived their names
from those of the corresponding attitudes. 

As for the rest, time, place, state, since they are easily intelligible,
I say no more about them than was said at the beginning, that in the
category of state are included such states as 'shod', 'armed', in
that of place 'in the Lyceum' and so on, as was explained before.

Part 10

The proposed categories have, then, been adequately dealt with.

We must next explain the various senses in which the term 'opposite'
is used. Things are said to be opposed in four senses: (i) as correlatives
to one another, (ii) as contraries to one another, (iii) as privatives
to positives, (iv) as affirmatives to negatives. 

Let me sketch my meaning in outline. An instance of the use of the
word 'opposite' with reference to correlatives is afforded by the
expressions 'double' and 'half'; with reference to contraries by 'bad'
and 'good'. Opposites in the sense of 'privatives' and 'positives'
are' blindness' and 'sight'; in the sense of affirmatives and negatives,
the propositions 'he sits', 'he does not sit'. 

(i) Pairs of opposites which fall under the category of relation are
explained by a reference of the one to the other, the reference being
indicated by the preposition 'of' or by some other preposition. Thus,
double is a relative term, for that which is double is explained as
the double of something. Knowledge, again, is the opposite of the
thing known, in the same sense; and the thing known also is explained
by its relation to its opposite, knowledge. For the thing known is
explained as that which is known by something, that is, by knowledge.
Such things, then, as are opposite the one to the other in the sense
of being correlatives are explained by a reference of the one to the
other. 

(ii) Pairs of opposites which are contraries are not in any way interdependent,
but are contrary the one to the other. The good is not spoken of as
the good of the had, but as the contrary of the bad, nor is white
spoken of as the white of the black, but as the contrary of the black.
These two types of opposition are therefore distinct. Those contraries
which are such that the subjects in which they are naturally present,
or of which they are predicated, must necessarily contain either the
one or the other of them, have no intermediate, but those in the case
of which no such necessity obtains, always have an intermediate. Thus
disease and health are naturally present in the body of an animal,
and it is necessary that either the one or the other should be present
in the body of an animal. Odd and even, again, are predicated of number,
and it is necessary that the one or the other should be present in
numbers. Now there is no intermediate between the terms of either
of these two pairs. On the other hand, in those contraries with regard
to which no such necessity obtains, we find an intermediate. Blackness
and whiteness are naturally present in the body, but it is not necessary
that either the one or the other should be present in the body, inasmuch
as it is not true to say that everybody must be white or black. Badness
and goodness, again, are predicated of man, and of many other things,
but it is not necessary that either the one quality or the other should
be present in that of which they are predicated: it is not true to
say that everything that may be good or bad must be either good or
bad. These pairs of contraries have intermediates: the intermediates
between white and black are grey, sallow, and all the other colours
that come between; the intermediate between good and bad is that which
is neither the one nor the other. 

Some intermediate qualities have names, such as grey and sallow and
all the other colours that come between white and black; in other
cases, however, it is not easy to name the intermediate, but we must
define it as that which is not either extreme, as in the case of that
which is neither good nor bad, neither just nor unjust. 

(iii) 'privatives' and 'Positives' have reference to the same subject.
Thus, sight and blindness have reference to the eye. It is a universal
rule that each of a pair of opposites of this type has reference to
that to which the particular 'positive' is natural. We say that that
is capable of some particular faculty or possession has suffered privation
when the faculty or possession in question is in no way present in
that in which, and at the time at which, it should naturally be present.
We do not call that toothless which has not teeth, or that blind which
has not sight, but rather that which has not teeth or sight at the
time when by nature it should. For there are some creatures which
from birth are without sight, or without teeth, but these are not
called toothless or blind. 

To be without some faculty or to possess it is not the same as the
corresponding 'privative' or 'positive'. 'Sight' is a 'positive',
'blindness' a 'privative', but 'to possess sight' is not equivalent
to 'sight', 'to be blind' is not equivalent to 'blindness'. Blindness
is a 'privative', to be blind is to be in a state of privation, but
is not a 'privative'. Moreover, if 'blindness' were equivalent to
'being blind', both would be predicated of the same subject; but though
a man is said to be blind, he is by no means said to be blindness.

To be in a state of 'possession' is, it appears, the opposite of being
in a state of 'privation', just as 'positives' and 'privatives' themselves
are opposite. There is the same type of antithesis in both cases;
for just as blindness is opposed to sight, so is being blind opposed
to having sight. 

That which is affirmed or denied is not itself affirmation or denial.
By 'affirmation' we mean an affirmative proposition, by 'denial' a
negative. Now, those facts which form the matter of the affirmation
or denial are not propositions; yet these two are said to be opposed
in the same sense as the affirmation and denial, for in this case
also the type of antithesis is the same. For as the affirmation is
opposed to the denial, as in the two propositions 'he sits', 'he does
not sit', so also the fact which constitutes the matter of the proposition
in one case is opposed to that in the other, his sitting, that is
to say, to his not sitting. 

It is evident that 'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed each
to each in the same sense as relatives. The one is not explained by
reference to the other; sight is not sight of blindness, nor is any
other preposition used to indicate the relation. Similarly blindness
is not said to be blindness of sight, but rather, privation of sight.
Relatives, moreover, reciprocate; if blindness, therefore, were a
relative, there would be a reciprocity of relation between it and
that with which it was correlative. But this is not the case. Sight
is not called the sight of blindness. 

That those terms which fall under the heads of 'positives' and 'privatives'
are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is plain from
the following facts: Of a pair of contraries such that they have no
intermediate, one or the other must needs be present in the subject
in which they naturally subsist, or of which they are predicated;
for it is those, as we proved,' in the case of which this necessity
obtains, that have no intermediate. Moreover, we cited health and
disease, odd and even, as instances. But those contraries which have
an intermediate are not subject to any such necessity. It is not necessary
that every substance, receptive of such qualities, should be either
black or white, cold or hot, for something intermediate between these
contraries may very well be present in the subject. We proved, moreover,
that those contraries have an intermediate in the case of which the
said necessity does not obtain. Yet when one of the two contraries
is a constitutive property of the subject, as it is a constitutive
property of fire to be hot, of snow to be white, it is necessary determinately
that one of the two contraries, not one or the other, should be present
in the subject; for fire cannot be cold, or snow black. Thus, it is
not the case here that one of the two must needs be present in every
subject receptive of these qualities, but only in that subject of
which the one forms a constitutive property. Moreover, in such cases
it is one member of the pair determinately, and not either the one
or the other, which must be present. 

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', on the other hand, neither
of the aforesaid statements holds good. For it is not necessary that
a subject receptive of the qualities should always have either the
one or the other; that which has not yet advanced to the state when
sight is natural is not said either to be blind or to see. Thus 'positives'
and 'privatives' do not belong to that class of contraries which consists
of those which have no intermediate. On the other hand, they do not
belong either to that class which consists of contraries which have
an intermediate. For under certain conditions it is necessary that
either the one or the other should form part of the constitution of
every appropriate subject. For when a thing has reached the stage
when it is by nature capable of sight, it will be said either to see
or to be blind, and that in an indeterminate sense, signifying that
the capacity may be either present or absent; for it is not necessary
either that it should see or that it should be blind, but that it
should be either in the one state or in the other. Yet in the case
of those contraries which have an intermediate we found that it was
never necessary that either the one or the other should be present
in every appropriate subject, but only that in certain subjects one
of the pair should be present, and that in a determinate sense. It
is, therefore, plain that 'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed
each to each in either of the senses in which contraries are opposed.

Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should
be changes from either into the other, while the subject retains its
identity, unless indeed one of the contraries is a constitutive property
of that subject, as heat is of fire. For it is possible that that
that which is healthy should become diseased, that which is white,
black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad, that which
is bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into a better way
of life and thought, may make some advance, however slight, and if
he should once improve, even ever so little, it is plain that he might
change completely, or at any rate make very great progress; for a
man becomes more and more easily moved to virtue, however small the
improvement was at first. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that
he will make yet greater progress than he has made in the past; and
as this process goes on, it will change him completely and establish
him in the contrary state, provided he is not hindered by lack of
time. In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', however, change
in both directions is impossible. There may be a change from possession
to privation, but not from privation to possession. The man who has
become blind does not regain his sight; the man who has become bald
does not regain his hair; the man who has lost his teeth does not
grow his grow a new set. (iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and
negation belong manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this
case, and in this case only, it is necessary for the one opposite
to be true and the other false. 

Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of correlatives,
nor in the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', is it necessary for
one to be true and the other false. Health and disease are contraries:
neither of them is true or false. 'Double' and 'half' are opposed
to each other as correlatives: neither of them is true or false. The
case is the same, of course, with regard to 'positives' and 'privatives'
such as 'sight' and 'blindness'. In short, where there is no sort
of combination of words, truth and falsity have no place, and all
the opposites we have mentioned so far consist of simple words.

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed statements
are contraries, these, more than any other set of opposites, would
seem to claim this characteristic. 'Socrates is ill' is the contrary
of 'Socrates is well', but not even of such composite expressions
is it true to say that one of the pair must always be true and the
other false. For if Socrates exists, one will be true and the other
false, but if he does not exist, both will be false; for neither 'Socrates
is ill' nor 'Socrates is well' is true, if Socrates does not exist
at all. 

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', if the subject does not
exist at all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject
exists, it is not always the fact that one is true and the other false.
For 'Socrates has sight' is the opposite of 'Socrates is blind' in
the sense of the word 'opposite' which applies to possession and privation.
Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary that one should be true
and the other false, for when he is not yet able to acquire the power
of vision, both are false, as also if Socrates is altogether non-existent.

But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject exists
or not, one is always false and the other true. For manifestly, if
Socrates exists, one of the two propositions 'Socrates is ill', 'Socrates
is not ill', is true, and the other false. This is likewise the case
if he does not exist; for if he does not exist, to say that he is
ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. Thus it is in the
case of those opposites only, which are opposite in the sense in which
the term is used with reference to affirmation and negation, that
the rule holds good, that one of the pair must be true and the other
false. 

Part 11

That the contrary of a good is an evil is shown by induction: the
contrary of health is disease, of courage, cowardice, and so on. But
the contrary of an evil is sometimes a good, sometimes an evil. For
defect, which is an evil, has excess for its contrary, this also being
an evil, and the mean. which is a good, is equally the contrary of
the one and of the other. It is only in a few cases, however, that
we see instances of this: in most, the contrary of an evil is a good.

In the case of contraries, it is not always necessary that if one
exists the other should also exist: for if all become healthy there
will be health and no disease, and again, if everything turns white,
there will be white, but no black. Again, since the fact that Socrates
is ill is the contrary of the fact that Socrates is well, and two
contrary conditions cannot both obtain in one and the same individual
at the same time, both these contraries could not exist at once: for
if that Socrates was well was a fact, then that Socrates was ill could
not possibly be one. 

It is plain that contrary attributes must needs be present in subjects
which belong to the same species or genus. Disease and health require
as their subject the body of an animal; white and black require a
body, without further qualification; justice and injustice require
as their subject the human soul. 

Moreover, it is necessary that pairs of contraries should in all cases
either belong to the same genus or belong to contrary genera or be
themselves genera. White and black belong to the same genus, colour;
justice and injustice, to contrary genera, virtue and vice; while
good and evil do not belong to genera, but are themselves actual genera,
with terms under them. 

Part 12

There are four senses in which one thing can be said to be 'prior'
to another. Primarily and most properly the term has reference to
time: in this sense the word is used to indicate that one thing is
older or more ancient than another, for the expressions 'older' and
'more ancient' imply greater length of time. 

Secondly, one thing is said to be 'prior' to another when the sequence
of their being cannot be reversed. In this sense 'one' is 'prior'
to 'two'. For if 'two' exists, it follows directly that 'one' must
exist, but if 'one' exists, it does not follow necessarily that 'two'
exists: thus the sequence subsisting cannot be reversed. It is agreed,
then, that when the sequence of two things cannot be reversed, then
that one on which the other depends is called 'prior' to that other.

In the third place, the term 'prior' is used with reference to any
order, as in the case of science and of oratory. For in sciences which
use demonstration there is that which is prior and that which is posterior
in order; in geometry, the elements are prior to the propositions;
in reading and writing, the letters of the alphabet are prior to the
syllables. Similarly, in the case of speeches, the exordium is prior
in order to the narrative. 

Besides these senses of the word, there is a fourth. That which is
better and more honourable is said to have a natural priority. In
common parlance men speak of those whom they honour and love as 'coming
first' with them. This sense of the word is perhaps the most far-fetched.

Such, then, are the different senses in which the term 'prior' is
used. 

Yet it would seem that besides those mentioned there is yet another.
For in those things, the being of each of which implies that of the
other, that which is in any way the cause may reasonably be said to
be by nature 'prior' to the effect. It is plain that there are instances
of this. The fact of the being of a man carries with it the truth
of the proposition that he is, and the implication is reciprocal:
for if a man is, the proposition wherein we allege that he is true,
and conversely, if the proposition wherein we allege that he is true,
then he is. The true proposition, however, is in no way the cause
of the being of the man, but the fact of the man's being does seem
somehow to be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for the truth
or falsity of the proposition depends on the fact of the man's being
or not being. 

Thus the word 'prior' may be used in five senses. 

Part 13

The term 'simultaneous' is primarily and most appropriately applied
to those things the genesis of the one of which is simultaneous with
that of the other; for in such cases neither is prior or posterior
to the other. Such things are said to be simultaneous in point of
time. Those things, again, are 'simultaneous' in point of nature,
the being of each of which involves that of the other, while at the
same time neither is the cause of the other's being. This is the case
with regard to the double and the half, for these are reciprocally
dependent, since, if there is a double, there is also a half, and
if there is a half, there is also a double, while at the same time
neither is the cause of the being of the other. 

Again, those species which are distinguished one from another and
opposed one to another within the same genus are said to be 'simultaneous'
in nature. I mean those species which are distinguished each from
each by one and the same method of division. Thus the 'winged' species
is simultaneous with the 'terrestrial' and the 'water' species. These
are distinguished within the same genus, and are opposed each to each,
for the genus 'animal' has the 'winged', the 'terrestrial', and the
'water' species, and no one of these is prior or posterior to another;
on the contrary, all such things appear to be 'simultaneous' in nature.
Each of these also, the terrestrial, the winged, and the water species,
can be divided again into subspecies. Those species, then, also will
be 'simultaneous' point of nature, which, belonging to the same genus,
are distinguished each from each by one and the same method of differentiation.

But genera are prior to species, for the sequence of their being cannot
be reversed. If there is the species 'water-animal', there will be
the genus 'animal', but granted the being of the genus 'animal', it
does not follow necessarily that there will be the species 'water-animal'.

Those things, therefore, are said to be 'simultaneous' in nature,
the being of each of which involves that of the other, while at the
same time neither is in any way the cause of the other's being; those
species, also, which are distinguished each from each and opposed
within the same genus. Those things, moreover, are 'simultaneous'
in the unqualified sense of the word which come into being at the
same time. 

Part 14

There are six sorts of movement: generation, destruction, increase,
diminution, alteration, and change of place. 

It is evident in all but one case that all these sorts of movement
are distinct each from each. Generation is distinct from destruction,
increase and change of place from diminution, and so on. But in the
case of alteration it may be argued that the process necessarily implies
one or other of the other five sorts of motion. This is not true,
for we may say that all affections, or nearly all, produce in us an
alteration which is distinct from all other sorts of motion, for that
which is affected need not suffer either increase or diminution or
any of the other sorts of motion. Thus alteration is a distinct sort
of motion; for, if it were not, the thing altered would not only be
altered, but would forthwith necessarily suffer increase or diminution
or some one of the other sorts of motion in addition; which as a matter
of fact is not the case. Similarly that which was undergoing the process
of increase or was subject to some other sort of motion would, if
alteration were not a distinct form of motion, necessarily be subject
to alteration also. But there are some things which undergo increase
but yet not alteration. The square, for instance, if a gnomon is applied
to it, undergoes increase but not alteration, and so it is with all
other figures of this sort. Alteration and increase, therefore, are
distinct. 

Speaking generally, rest is the contrary of motion. But the different
forms of motion have their own contraries in other forms; thus destruction
is the contrary of generation, diminution of increase, rest in a place,
of change of place. As for this last, change in the reverse direction
would seem to be most truly its contrary; thus motion upwards is the
contrary of motion downwards and vice versa. 

In the case of that sort of motion which yet remains, of those that
have been enumerated, it is not easy to state what is its contrary.
It appears to have no contrary, unless one should define the contrary
here also either as 'rest in its quality' or as 'change in the direction
of the contrary quality', just as we defined the contrary of change
of place either as rest in a place or as change in the reverse direction.
For a thing is altered when change of quality takes place; therefore
either rest in its quality or change in the direction of the contrary
may be called the contrary of this qualitative form of motion. In
this way becoming white is the contrary of becoming black; there is
alteration in the contrary direction, since a change of a qualitative
nature takes place. 

Part 15

The term 'to have' is used in various senses. In the first place it
is used with reference to habit or disposition or any other quality,
for we are said to 'have' a piece of knowledge or a virtue. Then,
again, it has reference to quantity, as, for instance, in the case
of a man's height; for he is said to 'have' a height of three or four
cubits. It is used, moreover, with regard to apparel, a man being
said to 'have' a coat or tunic; or in respect of something which we
have on a part of ourselves, as a ring on the hand: or in respect
of something which is a part of us, as hand or foot. The term refers
also to content, as in the case of a vessel and wheat, or of a jar
and wine; a jar is said to 'have' wine, and a corn-measure wheat.
The expression in such cases has reference to content. Or it refers
to that which has been acquired; we are said to 'have' a house or
a field. A man is also said to 'have' a wife, and a wife a husband,
and this appears to be the most remote meaning of the term, for by
the use of it we mean simply that the husband lives with the wife.

Other senses of the word might perhaps be found, but the most ordinary
ones have all been enumerated. 

THE END

Part 1

We must, in the next place, investigate the subject of the dream,
and first inquire to which of the faculties of the soul it presents
itself, i.e. whether the affection is one which pertains to the faculty
of intelligence or to that of sense-perception; for these are the
only faculties within us by which we acquire knowledge. 

If, then, the exercise of the faculty of sight is actual seeing, that
of the auditory faculty, hearing, and, in general that of the faculty
of sense-perception, perceiving; and if there are some perceptions
common to the senses, such as figure, magnitude, motion, &amp;c., while
there are others, as colour, sound, taste, peculiar [each to its own
sense]; and further, if all creatures, when the eyes are closed in
sleep, are unable to see, and the analogous statement is true of the
other senses, so that manifestly we perceive nothing when asleep;
we may conclude that it is not by sense-perception we perceive a dream.

But neither is it by opinion that we do so. For [in dreams] we not
only assert, e.g. that some object approaching is a man or a horse

(which would be an exercise of opinion) , but that the object iswhite
or beautiful, points on which opinion without sense-perception asserts
nothing either truly or falsely. It is, however, a fact that the soul
makes such assertions in sleep. We seem to see equally well that the
approaching figure is a man, and that it is white. [In dreams], too,
we think something else, over and above the dream presentation, just
as we do in waking moments when we perceive something; for we often
also reason about that which we perceive. So, too, in sleep we sometimes
have thoughts other than the mere phantasms immediately before our
minds. This would be manifest to any one who should attend and try,
immediately on arising from sleep, to remember [his dreaming experience].
There are cases of persons who have seen such dreams, those, for example,
who believe themselves to be mentally arranging a given list of subjects
according to the mnemonic rule. They frequently find themselves engaged
in something else besides the dream, viz. in setting a phantasm which
they envisage into its mnemonic position. Hence it is plain that not
every 'phantasm' in sleep is a mere dream-image, and that the further
thinking which we perform then is due to an exercise of the faculty
of opinion. 

So much at least is plain on all these points, viz. that the faculty
by which, in waking hours, we are subject to illusion when affected
by disease, is identical with that which produces illusory effects
in sleep. So, even when persons are in excellent health, and know
the facts of the case perfectly well, the sun, nevertheless, appears
to them to be only a foot wide. Now, whether the presentative faculty
of the soul be identical with, or different from, the faculty of sense-perception,
in either case the illusion does not occur without our actually seeing
or [otherwise] perceiving something. Even to see wrongly or to hear
wrongly can happen only to one who sees or hears something real, though
not exactly what he supposes. But we have assumed that in sleep one
neither sees, nor hears, nor exercises any sense whatever. Perhaps
we may regard it as true that the dreamer sees nothing, yet as false
that his faculty of sense-perception is unaffected, the fact being
that the sense of seeing and the other senses may possibly be then
in a certain way affected, while each of these affections, as duly
as when he is awake, gives its impulse in a certain manner to his
[primary] faculty of sense, though not in precisely the same manner
as when he is awake. Sometimes, too, opinion says [to dreamers] just
as to those who are awake, that the object seen is an illusion; at
other times it is inhibited, and becomes a mere follower of the phantasm.

It is plain therefore that this affection, which we name 'dreaming',
is no mere exercise of opinion or intelligence, but yet is not an
affection of the faculty of perception in the simple sense. If it
were the latter it would be possible [when asleep] to hear and see
in the simple sense. 

How then, and in what manner, it takes place, is what we have to examine.
Let us assume, what is indeed clear enough, that the affection [of
dreaming] pertains to sense-perception as surely as sleep itself does.
For sleep does not pertain to one organ in animals and dreaming to
another; both pertain to the same organ. 

But since we have, in our work On the Soul, treated of presentation,
and the faculty of presentation is identical with that of sense-perception,
though the essential notion of a faculty of presentation is different
from that of a faculty of sense-perception; and since presentation
is the movement set up by a sensory faculty when actually discharging
its function, while a dream appears to be a presentation (for a presentation
which occurs in sleep-whether simply or in some particular way-is
what we call a dream): it manifestly follows that dreaming is an activity
of the faculty of sense-perception, but belongs to this faculty qua
presentative. 

Part 2

We can best obtain a scientific view of the nature of the dream and
the manner in which it originates by regarding it in the light of
the circumstances attending sleep. The objects of sense-perception
corresponding to each sensory organ produce sense-perception in us,
and the affection due to their operation is present in the organs
of sense not only when the perceptions are actualized, but even when
they have departed. 

What happens in these cases may be compared with what happens in the
case of projectiles moving in space. For in the case of these the
movement continues even when that which set up the movement is no
longer in contact [with the things that are moved]. For that which
set them in motion moves a certain portion of air, and this, in turn,
being moved excites motion in another portion; and so, accordingly,
it is in this way that [the bodies], whether in air or in liquids,
continue moving, until they come to a standstill. 

This we must likewise assume to happen in the case of qualitative
change; for that part which [for example] has been heated by something
hot, heats [in turn] the part next to it, and this propagates the
affection continuously onwards until the process has come round to
its oint of origination. This must also happen in the organ wherein
the exercise of sense-perception takes place, since sense-perception,
as realized in actual perceiving, is a mode of qualitative change.
This explains why the affection continues in the sensory organs, both
in their deeper and in their more superficial parts, not merely while
they are actually engaged in perceiving, but even after they have
ceased to do so. That they do this, indeed, is obvious in cases where
we continue for some time engaged in a particular form of perception,
for then, when we shift the scene of our perceptive activity, the
previous affection remains; for instance, when we have turned our
gaze from sunlight into darkness. For the result of this is that one
sees nothing, owing to the excited by the light still subsisting in
our eyes. Also, when we have looked steadily for a long while at one
colour, e.g. at white or green, that to which we next transfer our
gaze appears to be of the same colour. Again if, after having looked
at the sun or some other brilliant object, we close the eyes, then,
if we watch carefully, it appears in a right line with the direction
of vision (whatever this may be), at first in its own colour; then
it changes to crimson, next to purple, until it becomes black and
disappears. And also when persons turn away from looking at objects
in motion, e.g. rivers, and especially those which flow very rapidly,
they find that the visual stimulations still present themselves, for
the things really at rest are then seen moving: persons become very
deaf after hearing loud noises, and after smelling very strong odours
their power of smelling is impaired; and similarly in other cases.
These phenomena manifestly take place in the way above described.

That the sensory organs are acutely sensitive to even a slight qualitative
difference [in their objects] is shown by what happens in the case
of mirrors; a subject to which, even taking it independently, one
might devote close consideration and inquiry. At the same time it
becomes plain from them that as the eye [in seeing] is affected [by
the object seen], so also it produces a certain effect upon it. If
a woman chances during her menstrual period to look into a highly
polished mirror, the surface of it will grow cloudy with a blood-coloured
haze. It is very hard to remove this stain from a new mirror, but
easier to remove from an older mirror. As we have said before, the
cause of this lies in the fact that in the act of sight there occurs
not only a passion in the sense organ acted on by the polished surface,
but the organ, as an agent, also produces an action, as is proper
to a brilliant object. For sight is the property of an organ possessing
brilliance and colour. The eyes, therefore, have their proper action
as have other parts of the body. Because it is natural to the eye
to be filled with blood-vessels, a woman's eyes, during the period
of menstrual flux and inflammation, will undergo a change, although
her husband will not note this since his seed is of the same nature
as that of his wife. The surrounding atmosphere, through which operates
the action of sight, and which surrounds the mirror also, will undergo
a change of the same sort that occurred shortly before in the woman's
eyes, and hence the surface of the mirror is likewise affected. And
as in the case of a garment, the cleaner it is the more quickly it
is soiled, so the same holds true in the case of the mirror. For anything
that is clean will show quite clearly a stain that it chances to receive,
and the cleanest object shows up even the slightest stain. A bronze
mirror, because of its shininess, is especially sensitive to any sort
of contact (the movement of the surrounding air acts upon it like
a rubbing or pressing or wiping); on that account, therefore, what
is clean will show up clearly the slightest touch on its surface.
It is hard to cleanse smudges off new mirrors because the stain penetrates
deeply and is suffused to all parts; it penetrates deeply because
the mirror is not a dense medium, and is suffused widely because of
the smoothness of the object. On the other hand, in the case of old
mirrors, stains do not remain because they do not penetrate deeply,
but only smudge the surface. 

From this therefore it is plain that stimulatory motion is set up
even by slight differences, and that sense-perception is quick to
respond to it; and further that the organ which perceives colour is
not only affected by its object, but also reacts upon it. Further
evidence to the same point is afforded by what takes place in wines,
and in the manufacture of unguents. For both oil, when prepared, and
wine become rapidly infected by the odours of the things near them;
they not only acquire the odours of the things thrown into or mixed
with them, but also those of the things which are placed, or which
grow, near the vessels containing them. 

In order to answer our original question, let us now, therefore, assume
one proposition, which is clear from what precedes, viz. that even
when the external object of perception has departed, the impressions
it has made persist, and are themselves objects of perception: and
[let us assume], besides, that we are easily deceived respecting the
operations of sense-perception when we are excited by emotions, and
different persons according to their different emotions; for example,
the coward when excited by fear, the amorous person by amorous desire;
so that, with but little resemblance to go upon, the former thinks
he sees his foes approaching, the latter, that he sees the object
of his desire; and the more deeply one is under the influence of the
emotion, the less similarity is required to give rise to these illusory
impressions. Thus too, both in fits of anger, and also in all states
of appetite, all men become easily deceived, and more so the more
their emotions are excited. This is the reason too why persons in
the delirium of fever sometimes think they see animals on their chamber
walls, an illusion arising from the faint resemblance to animals of
the markings thereon when put together in patterns; and this sometimes
corresponds with the emotional states of the sufferers, in such a
way that, if the latter be not very ill, they know well enough that
it is an illusion; but if the illness is more severe they actually
move according to the appearances. The cause of these occurrences
is that the faculty in virtue of which the controlling sense judges
is not identical with that in virtue of which presentations come before
the mind. A proof of this is, that the sun presents itself as only
a foot in diameter, though often something else gainsays the presentation.
Again, when the fingers are crossed, the one object 
(placed between them) is felt [by the touch] as two; but yet we denythat
it is two; for sight is more authoritative than touch. Yet, if touch
stood alone, we should actually have pronounced the one object to
be two. The ground of such false judgements is that any appearances
whatever present themselves, not only when its object stimulates a
sense, but also when the sense by itself alone is stimulated, provided
only it be stimulated in the same manner as it is by the object. For
example, to persons sailing past the land seems to move, when it is
really the eye that is being moved by something else [the moving ship.]

Part 3

From this it is manifest that the stimulatory movements based upon
sensory impressions, whether the latter are derived from external
objects or from causes within the body, present themselves not only
when persons are awake, but also then, when this affection which is
called sleep has come upon them, with even greater impressiveness.
For by day, while the senses and the intellect are working together,
they (i.e. such movements) are extruded from consciousness or obscured,
just as a smaller is beside a larger fire, or as small beside great
pains or pleasures, though, as soon as the latter have ceased, even
those which are trifling emerge into notice. But by night

(i.e. in sleep) owing to the inaction of the particular senses, andtheir
powerlessness to realize themselves, which arises from the reflux
of the hot from the exterior parts to the interior, they

(i.e. the above 'movements') are borne in to the head quarters ofsense-perception,
and there display themselves as the disturbance (of waking life) subsides.
We must suppose that, like the little eddies which are being ever
formed in rivers, so the sensory movements are each a continuous process,
often remaining like what they were when first started, but often,
too, broken into other forms by collisions with obstacles. This [last
mentioned point], moreover, gives the reason why no dreams occur in
sleep immediately after meals, or to sleepers who are extremely young,
e.g. to infants. The internal movement in such cases is excessive,
owing to the heat generated from the food. Hence, just as in a liquid,
if one vehemently disturbs it, sometimes no reflected image appears,
while at other times one appears, indeed, but utterly distorted, so
as to seem quite unlike its original; while, when once the motion
has ceased, the reflected images are clear and plain; in the same
manner during sleep the phantasms, or residuary movements, which are
based upon the sensory impressions, become sometimes quite obliterated
by the above described motion when too violent; while at other times
the sights are indeed seen, but confused and weird, and the dreams

(which then appear) are unhealthy, like those of persons who areatrabilious,
or feverish, or intoxicated with wine. For all such affections, being
spirituous, cause much commotion and disturbance. In sanguineous animals,
in proportion as the blood becomes calm, and as its purer are separated
from its less pure elements, the fact that the movement, based on
impressions derived from each of the organs of sense, is preserved
in its integrity, renders the dreams healthy, causes a [clear] image
to present itself, and makes the dreamer think, owing to the effects
borne in from the organ of sight, that he actually sees, and owing
to those which come from the organ of hearing, that he really hears;
and so on with those also which proceed from the other sensory organs.
For it is owing to the fact that the movement which reaches the primary
organ of sense comes from them, that one even when awake believes
himself to see, or hear, or otherwise perceive; just as it is from
a belief that the organ of sight is being stimulated, though in reality
not so stimulated, that we sometimes erroneously declare ourselves
to see, or that, from the fact that touch announces two movements,
we think that the one object is two. For, as a rule, the governing
sense affirms the report of each particular sense, unless another
particular sense, more authoritative, makes a contradictory report.
In every case an appearance presents itself, but what appears does
not in every case seem real, unless when the deciding faculty is inhibited,
or does not move with its proper motion. Moreover, as we said that
different men are subject to illusions, each according to the different
emotion present in him, so it is that the sleeper, owing to sleep,
and to the movements then going on in his sensory organs, as well
as to the other facts of the sensory process, [is liable to illusion],
so that the dream presentation, though but little like it, appears
as some actual given thing. For when one is asleep, in proportion
as most of the blood sinks inwards to its fountain [the heart], the
internal 
(sensory) movements, some potential, others actual accompany itinwards.
They are so related [in general] that, if anything move the blood,
some one sensory movement will emerge from it, while if this perishes
another will take its place; while to one another also they are related
in the same way as the artificial frogs in water which severally rise
[in fixed succesion] to the surface in the order in which the salt
[which keeps them down] becomes dissolved. The residuary movements
are like these: they are within the soul potentially, but actualize
themselves only when the impediment to their doing so has been relaxed;
and according as they are thus set free, they begin to move in the
blood which remains in the sensory organs, and which is now but scanty,
while they possess verisimilitude after the manner of cloud-shapes,
which in their rapid metamorphoses one compares now to human beings
and a moment afterwards to centaurs. Each of them is however, as has
been said, the remnant of a sensory impression taken when sense was
actualizing itself; and when this, the true impression, has departed,
its remnant is still immanent, and it is correct to say of it, that
though not actually Koriskos, it is like Koriskos. For when the person
was actually perceiving, his controlling and judging sensory faculty
did not call it Koriskos, but, prompted by this [impression], called
the genuine person yonder Koriskos. Accordingly, this sensory impulse,
which, when actually perceiving, it [the controlling faculty] describes
(unless completely inhibited by the blood), it now [in dreams] when
quasi-perceiving, receives from the movements persisting in the sense-organs,
and mistakes it-an impulse that is merely like the true [objective]
impression-for the true impression itself, while the effect of sleep
is so great that it causes this mistake to pass unnoticed. Accordingly,
just as if a finger be inserted beneath the eyeball without being
observed, one object will not only present two visual images, but
will create an opinion of its being two objects; while if it [the
finger] be observed, the presentation will be the same, but the same
opinion will not be formed of it; exactly so it is in states of sleep:
if the sleeper perceives that he is asleep, and is conscious of the
sleeping state during which the perception comes before his mind,
it presents itself still, but something within him speaks to this
effect: 'the image of Koriskos presents itself, but the real Koriskos
is not present'; for often, when one is asleep, there is something
in consciousness which declares that what then presents itself is
but a dream. If, however, he is not aware of being asleep, there is
nothing which will contradict the testimony of the bare presentation.

That what we here urge is true, i.e. that there are such presentative
movements in the sensory organs, any one may convince himself, if
he attends to and tries to remember the affections we experience when
sinking into slumber or when being awakened. He will sometimes, in
the moment of awakening, surprise the images which present themselves
to him in sleep, and find that they are really but movements lurking
in the organs of sense. And indeed some very young persons, if it
is dark, though looking with wide open eyes, see multitudes of phantom
figures moving before them, so that they often cover up their heads
in terror. 

From all this, then, the conclusion to be drawn is, that the dream
is a sort of presentation, and, more particularly, one which occurs
in sleep; since the phantoms just mentioned are not dreams, nor is
any other a dream which presents itself when the sense-perceptions
are in a state of freedom. Nor is every presentation which occurs
in sleep necessarily a dream. For in the first place, some persons
[when asleep] actually, in a certain way, perceive sounds, light,
savour, and contact; feebly, however, and, as it were, remotely. For
there have been cases in which persons while asleep, but with the
eyes partly open, saw faintly in their sleep (as they supposed) the
light of a lamp, and afterwards, on being awakened, straightway recognized
it as the actual light of a real lamp; while, in other cases, persons
who faintly heard the crowing of cocks or the barking of dogs identified
these clearly with the real sounds as soon as they awoke. Some persons,
too, return answers to questions put to them in sleep. For it is quite
possible that, of waking or sleeping, while the one is present in
the ordinary sense, the other also should be present in a certain
way. But none of these occurrences should be called a dream. Nor should
the true thoughts, as distinct from the mere presentations, which
occur in sleep [be called dreams]. The dream proper is a presentation
based on the movement of sense impressions, when such presentation
occurs during sleep, taking sleep in the strict sense of the term.

There are cases of persons who in their whole lives have never had
a dream, while others dream when considerably advanced in years, having
never dreamed before. The cause of their not having dreams appears
somewhat like that which operates in the case of infants, and

(that which operates) immediately after meals. It is intelligibleenough
that no dream-presentation should occur to persons whose natural constitution
is such that in them copious evaporation is borne upwards, which,
when borne back downwards, causes a large quantity of motion. But
it is not surprising that, as age advances, a dream should at length
appear to them. Indeed, it is inevitable that, as a change is wrought
in them in proportion to age or emotional experience, this reversal
[from non-dreaming to dreaming] should occur also. 

THE END

Part 1

We have now to consider the parts which are useful to animals for
movement in place (locomotion); first, why each part is such as it
is and to what end they possess them; and second, the differences
between these parts both in one and the same creature, and again by
comparison of the parts of creatures of different species with one
another. First then let us lay down how many questions we have to
consider. 

The first is what are the fewest points of motion necessary to animal
progression, the second why sanguineous animals have four points and
not more, but bloodless animals more than four, and generally why
some animals are footless, others bipeds, others quadrupeds, others
polypods, and why all have an even number of feet, if they have feet
at all; why in fine the points on which progression depends are even
in number. 

Next, why are man and bird bipeds, but fish footless; and why do man
and bird, though both bipeds, have an opposite curvature of the legs.
For man bends his legs convexly, a bird has his bent concavely; again,
man bends his arms and legs in opposite directions, for he has his
arms bent convexly, but his legs concavely. And a viviparous quadruped
bends his limbs in opposite directions to a man's, and in opposite
directions to one another; for he has his forelegs bent convexly,
his hind legs concavely. Again, quadrupeds which are not viviparous
but oviparous have a peculiar curvature of the limbs laterally away
from the body. Again, why do quadrupeds move their legs criss-cross?

We have to examine the reasons for all these facts, and others cognate
to them; that the facts are such is clear from our Natural History,
we have now to ask reasons for the facts. 

Part 2

At the beginning of the inquiry we must postulate the principles we
are accustomed constantly to use for our scientific investigation
of nature, that is we must take for granted principles of this universal
character which appear in all Nature's work. Of these one is that
Nature creates nothing without a purpose, but always the best possible
in each kind of living creature by reference to its essential constitution.
Accordingly if one way is better than another that is the way of Nature.
Next we must take for granted the different species of dimensions
which inhere in various things; of these there are three pairs of
two each, superior and inferior, before and behind, to the right and
to the left. Further we must assume that the originals of movements
in place are thrusts and pulls. (These are the essential place-movements,
it is only accidentally that what is carried by another is moved;
it is not thought to move itself, but to be moved by something else.)

Part 3

After these preliminaries, we go on to the next questions in order.

Now of animals which change their position some move with the whole
body at once, for example jumping animals, others move one part first
and then the other, for example walking (and running) animals. In
both these changes the moving creature always changes its position
by pressing against what lies below it. Accordingly if what is below
gives way too quickly for that which is moving upon it to lean against
it, or if it affords no resistance at all to what is moving, the latter
can of itself effect no movement upon it. For an animal which jumps
makes its jump both by leaning against its own upper part and also
against what is beneath its feet; for at the joints the parts do in
a sense lean upon one another, and in general that which pushes down
leans upon what is pushed down. That is why athletes jump further
with weights in their hands than without, and runners run faster if
they swing their arms; there is in extending the arms a kind of leaning
against the hands and wrists. In all cases then that which moves makes
its change of position by the use of at least two parts of the body;
one part so to speak squeezes, the other is squeezed; for the part
that is still is squeezed as it has to carry the weight, the part
that is lifted strains against that which carries the weight. It follows
then that nothing without parts can move itself in this way, for it
has not in it the distinction of the part which is passive and that
which is active. 

Part 4

Again, the boundaries by which living beings are naturally determined
are six in number, superior and inferior, before and behind, right
and left. Of these all living beings have a superior and an inferior
part; for superior and inferior is in plants too, not only in animals.
And this distinction is one of function, not merely of position relatively
to our earth and the sky above our heads. The superior is that from
which flows in each kind the distribution of nutriment and the process
of growth; the inferior is that to which the process flows and in
which it ends. One is a starting-point, the other an end, and the
starting-point is the superior. And yet it might be thought that in
the case of plants at least the inferior is rather the appropriate
starting-point, for in them the superior and inferior are in position
other than in animals. Still they are similarly situated from the
point of view of function, though not in their position relatively
to the universe. The roots are the superior part of a plant, for from
them the nutriment is distributed to the growing members, and a plant
takes it with its roots as an animal does with its mouth.

Things that are not only alive but are animals have both a front and
a back, because they all have sense, and front and back are distinguished
by reference to sense. The front is the part in which sense is innate,
and whence each thing gets its sensations, the opposite parts are
the back. 

All animals which partake not only in sense, but are able of themselves
to make a change of place, have a further distinction of left and
right besides those already enumerated; like the former these are
distinctions of function and not of position. The right is that from
which change of position naturally begins, the opposite which naturally
depends upon this is the left. 

This distinction (of right and left) is more articulate and detailed
in some than in others. For animals which make the aforesaid change
(of place) by the help of organized parts (I mean feet for example,
or wings or similar organs) have the left and right distinguished
in greater detail, while those which are not differentiated into such
parts, but make the differentiation in the body itself and so progress,
like some footless animals (for example snakes and caterpillars after
their kind, and besides what men call earth-worms), all these have
the distinction spoken of, although it is not made so manifest to
us. That the beginning of movement is on the right is indicated by
the fact that all men carry burdens on the left shoulder; in this
way they set free the side which initiates movement and enable the
side which bears the weight to be moved. And so men hop easier on
the left leg; for the nature of the right is to initiate movement,
that of the left to be moved. The burden then must rest on the side
which is to be moved, not on that which is going to cause movement,
and if it be set on the moving side, which is the original of movement,
it will either not be moved at all or with more labour. Another indication
that the right is the source of movement is the way we put our feet
forward; all men lead off with the left, and after standing still
prefer to put the left foot forward, unless something happens to prevent
it. The reason is that their movement comes from the leg they step
off, not from the one put forward. Again, men guard themselves with
their right. And this is the reason why the right is the same in all,
for that from which motion begins is the same for all, and has its
natural position in the same place, and for this reason the spiral-shaped
Testaceans have their shells on the right, for they do not move in
the direction of the spire, but all go forward in the direction opposite
to the spire. Examples are the murex and the ceryx. As all animals
then start movement from the right, and the right moves in the same
direction as the whole, it is necessary for all to be alike right-handed.
And man has the left limbs detached more than any other animal because
he is natural in a higher degree than the other animals; now the right
is naturally both better than the left and separate from it, and so
in man the right is more especially the right, more dextrous that
is, than in other animals. The right then being differentiated it
is only reasonable that in man the left should be most movable, and
most detached. In man, too, the other starting-points are found most
naturally and clearly distinct, the superior part that is and the
front. 

Part 5

Animals which, like men and birds, have the superior part distinguished
from the front are two-footed (biped). In them, of the four points
of motion, two are wings in the one, hands and arms in the other.
Animals which have the superior and the front parts identically situated
are four-footed, many-footed, or footless (quadruped, polypod, limbless).
I use the term foot for a member employed for movement in place connected
with a point on the ground, for the feet appear to have got their
name from the ground under our feet. 

Some animals, too, have the front and back parts identically situated,
for example, Cephalopods (molluscs) and spiral-shaped Testaceans,
and these we have discussed elsewhere in another connexion.

Now there is in place a superior, an intermediate, and an inferior;
in respect to place bipeds have their superior part corresponding
to the part of the universe; quadrupeds, polypods, and footless animals
to the intermediate part, and plants to the inferior. The reason is
that these have no power of locomotion, and the superior part is determined
relatively to the nutriment, and their nutriment is from the earth.
Quadrupeds, polypods, and footless animals again have their superior
part corresponding to the intermediate, because they are not erect.
Bipeds have theirs corresponding to the superior part of the universe
because they are erect, and of bipeds, man par excellence; for man
is the most natural of bipeds. And it is reasonable for the starting
points to be in these parts; for the starting-point is honourable,
and the superior is more honourable than the inferior, the front than
the back, and the right than the left. Or we may reverse the argument
and say quite well that these parts are more honourable than their
opposites just because the starting-points are in them. 

Part 6

The above discussion has made it clear that the original of movement
is in the parts on the right. Now every continuous whole, one part
of which is moved while the other remains at rest must, in order to
be able to move as a whole while one part stands still, have in the
place where both parts have opposed movements some common part which
connects the moving parts with one another. Further in this common
part the original of the motion (and similarly of the absence of motion)
of each of the parts must lie. 

Clearly then if any of the opposite pairs of parts (right and left,
that is, superior and inferior, before and behind) have a movement
of their own, each of them has for common original of its movements
the juncture of the parts in question. 

Now before and behind are not distinctions relatively to that which
sets up its own motion, because in nature nothing has a movement backwards,
nor has a moving animal any division whereby it may make a change
of position towards its front or back; but right and left, superior
and inferior are so distinguished. Accordingly, all animals which
progress by the use of distinct members have these members distinguished
not by the differences of before and behind, but only of the remaining
two pairs; the prior difference dividing these members into right
and left (a difference which must appear as soon as you have division
into two), and the other difference appearing of necessity where there
is division into four. 

Since then these two pairs, the superior and inferior and the right
and left, are linked to one another by the same common original (by
which I mean that which controls their movement), and further, everything
which is intended to make a movement in each such part properly must
have the original cause of all the said movements arranged in a certain
definite position relatively to the distances from it of the originals
of the movements of the individual members (and these centres of the
individual parts are in pairs arranged coordinately or diagonally,
and the common centre is the original from which the animal's movements
of right and left, and similarly of superior and inferior, start);
each animal must have this original at a point where it is equally
or nearly equally related to each of the centres in the four parts
described. 

Part 7

It is clear then how locomotion belongs to those animals only which
make their changes of place by means of two or four points in their
structure, or to such animals par excellence. Moreover, since this
property belongs almost peculiarly to Sanguineous animals, we see
that no Sanguineous animal can progress at more points than four,
and that if it is the nature of anything so to progress at four points
it must of necessity be Sanguineous. 

What we observe in the animal world is in agreement with the above
account. For no Sanguineous animal if it be divided into more parts
can live for any appreciable length of time, nor can it enjoy the
power of locomotion which it possessed while it was a continuous and
undivided whole. But some bloodless animals and polypods can live
a long time, if divided, in each of the severed parts, and can move
in the same way as before they were dismembered. Examples are what
is termed the centipede and other insects that are long in shape,
for even the hinder portion of all these goes on progressing in the
same direction as before when they are cut in two. 

The explanation of their living when thus divided is that each of
them is constructed like a continuous body of many separate living
beings. It is plain, too, from what was said above why they are like
this. Animals constructed most naturally are made to move at two or
four points, and even limbless Sanguinea are no exception. They too
move by dint of four points, whereby they achieve progression. They
go forward by means of two flexions. For in each of their flexions
there is a right and a left, both before and behind in their flat
surface, in the part towards the head a right and a left front point,
and in the part towards the tail the two hinder points. They look
as if they moved at two points only, where they touch before and behind,
but that is only because they are narrow in breadth. Even. in them
the right is the sovereign part, and there is an alternate correspondence
behind, exactly as in quadrupeds. The reason of their flexions is
their great length, for just as tall men walk with their spines bellied
(undulated) forward, and when their right shoulder is leading in a
forward direction their left hip rather inclined backwards, so that
their middle becomes hollow and bellied (undulated), so we ought to
conceive snakes as moving in concave curves (undulations) upon the
ground. And this is evidence that they move themselves like the quadrupeds,
for they make the concave in its turn convex and the convex concave.
When in its turn the left of the forward parts is leading, the concavity
is in its turn reversed, for the right becomes the inner. (Let the
right front point be A, the left B, the right hind C, the left D.)

Among land animals this is the character of the movement of snakes,
and among water animals of eels, and conger-eels and also lampreys,
in fact of all that have their form snakelike. However, some marine
animals of this shape have no fin, lampreys for example, but put the
sea to the same use as snakes do both land and water (for snakes swim
precisely as they move on the ground). Others have two fins only,
for example conger-eels and eels and a kind of cestreus which breeds
in the lake of Siphae. On this account too those that are accustomed
to live on land, for example all the eels, move with fewer flexions
in a fluid than on land, while the kind of cestreus which has two
fins, by its flexion in a fluid makes up the remaining points.

Part 8

The reason why snakes are limbless is first that nature makes nothing
without purpose, but always regards what is the best possible for
each individual, preserving the peculiar essence of each and its intended
character, and secondly the principle we laid down above that no Sanguineous
creature can move itself at more than four points. Granting this it
is evident that Sanguineous animals like snakes, whose length is out
of proportion to the rest of their dimensions, cannot possibly have
limbs; for they cannot have more than four (or they would be bloodless),
and if they had two or four they would be practically stationary;
so slow and unprofitable would their movement necessarily be.

But every limbed animal has necessarily an even number of such limbs.
For those which only jump and so move from place to place do not need
limbs for this movement at least, but those which not only jump but
also need to walk, finding that movement not sufficient for their
purposes, evidently either are better able to progress with even limbs
or cannot otherwise progress at all every animal which has limbs must
have an even us for as this kind of movement is effected by part of
the body at a time, and not by the whole at once as in the movement
of leaping, some of the limbs must in turn remain at rest, and others
be moved, and the animal must act in each of these cases with opposite
limbs, shifting the weight from the limbs that are being moved to
those at rest. And so nothing can walk on three limbs or on one; in
the latter case it has no support at all on which to rest the body's
weight, in the former only in respect of one pair of opposites, and
so it must necessarily fall in endeavouring so to move. 

Polypods however, like the Centipede, can indeed make progress on
an odd number of limbs, as may be seen by the experiment of wounding
one of their limbs; for then the mutilation of one row of limbs is
corrected by the number of limbs which remain on either side. Such
mutilated creatures, however, drag the wounded limb after them with
the remainder, and do not properly speaking walk. Moreover, it is
plain that they, too, would make the change of place better if they
had an even number, in fact if none were missing and they had the
limbs which correspond to one another. In this way they could equalize
their own weight, and not oscillate to one side, if they had corresponding
supports instead of one section of the opposite sides being unoccupied
by a limb. A walking creature advances from each of its members alternately,
for in this way it recovers the same figure that it had at first.

Part 9

The fact that all animals have an even number of feet, and the reasons
for the fact have been set forth. What follows will explain that if
there were no point at rest flexion and straightening would be impossible.
Flexion is a change from a right line to an arc or an angle, straightening
a change from either of these to a right line. Now in all such changes
the flexion or the straightening must be relative to one point. Moreover,
without flexion there could not be walking or swimming or flying.
For since limbed creatures stand and take their weight alternately
on one or other of the opposite legs, if one be thrust forward the
other of necessity must be bent. For the opposite limbs are naturally
of equal length, and the one which is under the weight must be a kind
of perpendicular at right angles to the ground. 

When then one leg is advanced it becomes the hypotenuse of a right-angled
triangle. Its square then is equal to the square on the other side
together with the square on the base. As the legs then are equal,
the one at rest must bend either at the knee or, if there were any
kneeless animal which walked, at some other articulation. The following
experiment exhibits the fact. If a man were to walk parallel to a
wall in sunshine, the line described (by the shadow of his head&amp;gt;
would be not straight but zigzag, becoming lower as he bends, and
higher when he stands and lifts himself up. 

It is, indeed, possible to move oneself even if the leg be not bent,
in the way in which children crawl. This was the old though erroneous
account of the movement of elephants. But these kinds of movements
involve a flexion in the shoulders or in the hips. Nothing at any
rate could walk upright continuously and securely without flexions
at the knee, but would have to move like men in the wrestling schools
who crawl forward through the sand on their knees. For the upper part
of the upright creature is long so that its leg has to be correspondingly
long; in consequence there must be flexion. For since a stationary
position is perpendicular, if that which moves cannot bend it will
either fall forward as the right angle becomes acute or will not be
able to progress. For if one leg is at right angles to the ground
and the other is advanced, the latter will be at once equal and greater.
For it will be equal to the stationary leg and also equivalent to
the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle. That which goes forward
therefore must bend, and while bending one, extend the other leg simultaneously,
so as to incline forward and make a stride and still remain above
the perpendicular; for the legs form an isosceles triangle, and the
head sinks lower when it is perpendicularly above the base on which
it stands. 

Of limbless animals, some progress by undulations (and this happens
in two ways, either they undulate on the ground, like snakes, or up
and down, like caterpillars), and undulation is a flexion; others
by a telescopic action, like what are called earthworms and leeches.
These go forward, first one part leading and then drawing the whole
of the rest of the body up to this, and so they change from place
to place. It is plain too that if the two curves were not greater
than the one line which subtends them undulating animals could not
move themselves; when the flexure is extended they would not have
moved forward at all if the flexure or arc were equal to the chord
subtended; as it is, it reaches further when it is straightened out,
and then this part stays still and it draws up what is left behind.

In all the changes described that which moves now extends itself in
a straight line to progress, and now is hooped; it straightens itself
in its leading part, and is hooped in what follows behind. Even jumping
animals all make a flexion in the part of the body which is underneath,
and after this fashion make their leaps. So too flying and swimming
things progress, the one straightening and bending their wings to
fly, the other their fins to swim. Of the latter some have four fins,
others which are rather long, for example eels, have only two. These
swim by substituting a flexion of the rest of their body for the (missing)
pair of fins to complete the movement, as we have said before. Flat
fish use two fins, and the flat of their body as a substitute for
the absent pair of fins. Quite flat fish, like the Ray, produce their
swimming movement with the actual fins and with the two extremes or
semicircles of their body, bending and straightening themselves alternately.

Part 10

A difficulty might perhaps be raised about birds. How, it may be said,
can they, either when they fly or when they walk, be said to move
at four points? Now we did not say that all Sanguinea move at four
points, but merely at not more than four. Moreover, they cannot as
a fact fly if their legs be removed, nor walk without their wings.
Even a man does not walk without moving his shoulders. Everything
indeed, as we have said, makes a change of place by flexion and straightening,
for all things progress by pressing upon what being beneath them up
to a point gives way as it were gradually; accordingly, even if there
be no flexion in another member, there must be at least in the point
whence motion begins, is in feathered (flying) insects at the base
of the 'scale-wing', in birds at the base of the wing, in others at
the base of the corresponding member, the fins, for instance, in fish.
In others, for example snakes, the flexion begins in the joints of
the body. 

In winged creatures the tail serves, like a ship's rudder, to keep
the flying thing in its course. The tail then must like other limbs
be able to bend at the point of attachment. And so flying insects,
and birds (Schizoptera) whose tails are ill-adapted for the use in
question, for example peacocks, and domestic cocks, and generally
birds that hardly fly, cannot steer a straight course. Flying insects
have absolutely no tail, and so drift along like a rudderless vessel,
and beat against anything they happen upon; and this applies equally
to sharded insects, like the scarab-beetle and the chafer, and to
unsharded, like bees and wasps. Further, birds that are not made for
flight have a tail that is of no use; for instance the purple coot
and the heron and all water-fowl. These fly stretching out their feet
as a substitute for a tail, and use their legs instead of a tail to
direct their flight. The flight of insects is slow and frail because
the character of their feathery wings is not proportionate to the
bulk of their body; this is heavy, their wings small and frail, and
so the flight they use is like a cargo boat attempting to make its
voyage with oars; now the frailty both of the actual wings and of
the outgrowths upon them contributes in a measure to the flight described.
Among birds, the peacock's tail is at one time useless because of
its size, at another because it is shed. But birds are in general
at the opposite pole to flying insects as regards their feathers,
but especially the swiftest flyers among them. (These are the birds
with curved talons, for swiftness of wing is useful to their mode
of life.) The rest of their bodily structure is in harmony with their
peculiar movement, the small head, the slight neck, the strong and
acute breastbone (acute like the prow of a clipper-built vessel, so
as to be well-girt, and strong by dint of its mass of flesh), in order
to be able to push away the air that beats against it, and that easily
and without exhaustion. The hind-quarters, too, are light and taper
again, in order to conform to the movement of the front and not by
their breadth to suck the air. 

Part 11

So much then for these questions. But why an animal that is to stand
erect must necessarily be not only a biped, but must also have the
superior parts of the body lighter, and those that lie under these
heavier, is plain. Only if situated like this could it possibly carry
itself easily. And so man, the only erect animal, has legs longer
and stouter relatively to the upper parts of his body than any other
animal with legs. What we observe in children also is evidence of
this. Children cannot walk erect because they are always dwarf-like,
the upper parts of their bodies being longer and stouter than the
lower. With advancing years the lower increase disproportionately,
until the children get their appropriate size, and then and not till
then they succeed in walking erect. Birds are hunchbacked yet stand
on two legs because their weight is set back, after the principle
of horses fashioned in bronze with their forelegs prancing. But their
being bipeds and able to stand is above all due to their having the
hip-bone shaped like a thigh, and so large that it looks as if they
had two thighs, one in the leg before the knee-joint, the other joining
his part to the fundament. Really this is not a thigh but a hip, and
if it were not so large the bird could not be a biped. As in a man
or a quadruped, the thigh and the rest of the leg would be attached
immediately to quite a small hip; consequently the whole body would
be tilted forward. As it is, however, the hip is long and extends
right along to the middle of the belly, so that the legs are attached
at that point and carry as supports the whole frame. It is also evident
from these considerations that a bird cannot possibly be erect in
the sense in which man is. For as it holds its body now the wings
are naturally useful to it, but if it were erect they would be as
useless as the wings of Cupids we see in pictures. It must have been
clear as soon as we spoke that the form of no human nor any similar
being permits of wings; not only because it would, though Sanguineous,
be moved at more than four points, but also because to have wings
would be useless to it when moving naturally. And Nature makes nothing
contrary to her own nature. 

Part 12

We have stated above that without flexion in the legs or shoulders
and hips no Sanguineous animal with feet could progress, and that
flexion is impossible except some point be at rest, and that men and
birds, both bipeds, bend their legs in opposite directions, and further
that quadrupeds bend their in opposite directions, and each pair in
the opposite way to a man's limbs. For men bend their arms backwards,
their legs forwards; quadrupeds their forelegs forwards, their back
legs backwards, and in like manner also birds bend theirs. The reason
is that Nature's workmanship is never purposeless, as we said above,
but everything for the best possible in the circumstances. Inasmuch,
therefore, as all creatures which naturally have the power of changing
position by the use of limbs, must have one leg stationary with the
weight of the body on it, and when they move forward the leg which
has the leading position must be unencumbered, and the progression
continuing the weight must shift and be taken off on this leading
leg, it is evidently necessary for the back leg from being bent to
become straight again, while the point of movement of the leg thrust
forward and its lower part remain still. And so the legs must be jointed.
And it is possible for this to take place and at the same time for
the animal to go forward, if the leading leg has its articulation
forwards, impossible if it be backwards. For, if it be forwards, the
stretching out of the leg will be while the body is going forwards,
but, if the other way, while it is going backwards. And again, if
the flexion were backwards, the placing of the foot would be made
by two movements and those contrary to one another, one, that is,
backwards and one forwards; for in the bending together of the limb
the lower end of the thigh would go backwards, and the shin would
move the foot forwards away from the flexion; whereas, with the flexion
forwards, the progression described will be performed not with contrary
motions, but with one forward motion. 

Now man, being a biped and making his change of position in the natural
way with his two legs, bends them forward for the reasons set forth,
but his arms bend backwards reasonably enough. If they bent the opposite
way they would be useless for the work of the hands, and for taking
food. But quadrupeds which are also viviparous necessarily bend their
front legs forwards. For these lead off first when they move, and
are also in the forepart of their body. The reason that they bend
forward is the same as in the case of man, for in this respect they
are like mankind. And so quadrupeds as well as men bend these legs
forward in the manner described. Moreover, if the flexion is like
this, they are enabled to lift their feet high; if they bent them
in the opposite way they would only lift them a little way from the
ground, because the whole thigh and the joint from which the shin-bone
springs would lie under the belly as the beast moved forward. If,
however, the flexion of the hind legs were forwards the lifting of
these feet would be similar to that of the forefeet (for the hind
legs, too, would in this case have only a little room for their lifting
inasmuch as both the thigh and the knee-joint would fall under the
position of the belly); but the flexion being backwards, as in fact
it is, nothing comes in the way of their progression with this mode
of moving the feet. Moreover, it is necessary or at least better for
their legs to bend thus when they are suckling their young, with a
view to such ministrations. If the flexion were inwards it would be
difficult to keep their young under them and to shelter them.

Part 13

Now there are four modes of flexion if we take the combinations in
pairs. Fore and hind may bend either both backwards, as the figures
marked A, or in the opposite way both forwards, as in B, or in converse
ways and not in the same direction, as in C where the fore bend forwards
and the hind bend backwards, or as in D, the opposite way to C, where
the convexities are turned towards one another and the concavities
outwards. Now no biped or quadruped bends his limbs like the figures
A or B, but the quadrupeds like C, and like D only the elephant among
quadrupeds and man if you consider his arms as well as his legs. For
he bends his arms concavely and his legs convexly. 

In man, too, the flexions of the limbs are always alternately opposite,
for example the elbow bends back, but the wrist of the hand forwards,
and again the shoulder forwards. In like fashion, too, in the case
of the legs, the hip backwards, the knee forwards, the ankle in the
opposite way backwards. And plainly the lower limbs are opposed in
this respect to the upper, because the first joints are opposites,
the shoulder bending forwards, the hip backwards; wherefore also the
ankle bends backwards, and the wrist of the hand forwards.

Part 14

This is the way then the limbs bend, and for the reasons given. But
the hind limbs move criss-cross with the fore limbs; after the off
fore they move the near hind, then the near fore, and then the off
hind. The reason is that (a) if they moved the forelegs together and
first, the animal would be wrenched, and the progression would be
a stumbling forwards with the hind parts as it were dragged after.
Again, that would not be walking but jumping, and it is hard to make
a continuous change of place, jumping all the time. Here is evidence
of what I say; even as it is, all horses that move in this way soon
begin to refuse, for example the horses in a religious procession.
For these reasons the fore limbs and the hind limbs move in this separate
way. Again, (b) if they moved both the right legs first the weight
would be outside the supporting limbs and they would fall. If then
it is necessary to move in one or other of these ways or criss-cross
fashion, and neither of these two is satisfactory, they must move
criss-cross; for moving in the way we have said they cannot possibly
experience either of these untoward results. And this is why horses
and such-like animals stand still with their legs put forward criss-cross,
not with the right or the left put forward together at once. In the
same fashion animals with more than four legs make their movements;
if you take two consecutive pairs of legs the hind move criss-cross
with the forelegs; you can see this if you watch them moving slowly.
Even crabs move in this way, and they are polypods. They, too, always
move criss-cross in whichever direction they are making progress.
For in direction this animal has a movement all its own; it is the
only animal that moves not forwards, but obliquely. Yet since forwards
is a distinction relative to the line of vision, Nature has made its
eyes able to conform to its limbs, for its eyes can move themselves
obliquely, and therefore after a fashion crabs are no exception but
in this sense move forwards. 

Part 15

Birds bend their legs in the same way as quadrupeds. For their natural
construction is broadly speaking nearly the same. That is, in birds
the wings are a substitute for the forelegs; and so they are bent
in the same way as the forelegs of a quadruped, since when they move
to progress the natural beginning of change is from the wings (as
in quadrupeds from the forelegs). Flight in fact is their appropriate
movement. And so if the wings be cut off a bird can neither stand
still nor go forwards. 

Again, the bird though a biped is not erect, and has the forward parts
of the body lighter than the hind, and so it is necessary (or at least
preferable for the standing posture) to have the thigh so placed below
the body as it actually is, I mean growing towards the back. If then
it must have this situation the flexion of the leg must be backwards,
as in the hind legs of quadrupeds. The reasons are the same as those
given in the case of viviparous quadrupeds. 

If now we survey generally birds and winged insects, and animals which
swim in a watery medium, all I mean that make their progress in water
by dint of organs of movement, it is not difficult to see that it
is better to have the attachment of the parts in question oblique
to the frame, exactly as in fact we see it to be both in birds and
insects. And this same arrangement obtains also among fishes. Among
birds the wings are attached obliquely; so are the fins in water animals,
and the feather-like wings of insects. In this way they divide the
air or water most quickly and with most force and so effect their
movement. For the hinder parts in this way would follow forwards as
they are carried along in the yielding medium, fish in the water,
birds in the air. 

Of oviparous quadrupeds all those that live in holes, like crocodiles,
lizards, spotted lizards, freshwater tortoises, and turtles, have
their legs attached obliquely as their whole body sprawls over the
ground, and bend them obliquely. The reason is that this is useful
for ease in creeping into holes, and for sitting upon their eggs and
guarding them. And as they are splayed outwards they must of necessity
tuck in their thighs and put them under them in order to achieve the
lifting of the whole body. In view of this they cannot bend them otherwise
than outwards. 

Part 16

We have already stated the fact that non-sanguineous animals with
limbs are polypods and none of them quadrupeds. And the reason why
their legs, except the extreme pairs, were necessarily attached obliquely
and had their flexions upwards, and the legs themselves were somewhat
turned under (bandy-shape) and backwards is plain. In all such creatures
the intermediate legs both lead and follow. If then they lay under
them, they must have had their flexion both forwards and backwards;
on account of leading, forwards; and on account of following, backwards.
Now since they have to do both, for this reason their limbs are turned
under and bent obliquely, except the two extreme pairs. (These two
are more natural in their movement, the front leading and the back
following.) Another reason for this kind of flexion is the number
of their legs; arranged in this way they would interfere less with
one another in progression and not knock together. But the reason
that they are bandy is that all of them or most of them live in holes,
for creatures living so cannot possibly be high above the ground.

But crabs are in nature the oddest of all polypods; they do not progress
forwards except in the sense explained above, they are the only animals
which have more than one pair of leading limbs. The explanation of
this is the hardness of their limbs, and the fact that they use them
not for swimming but for walking; they always keep on the ground.
However, the flexion of the limbs of all polypods is oblique, like
that of the quadrupeds which live in holes-for example lizards and
crocodiles and most of the oviparous quadrupeds. And the explanation
is that some of them in their breeding periods, and some all their
life, live in holes. 

Part 17

Now the rest have bandy legs because they are soft-skinned, but the
crayfish is hard-skinned and its limbs are for swimming and not for
walking (and so are not bandy). Crabs, too, have their limbs bent
obliquely, but not bandy like oviparous quadrupeds and non-sanguineous
polypods, because their limbs have a hard and shell-like skin, although
they don't swim but live in holes; they live in fact on the ground.
Moreover, their shape is like a disk, as compared with the crayfish
which is elongated, and they haven't a tail like the crayfish; a tail
is useful to the crayfish for swimming, but the crab is not a swimming
creature. Further, it alone has its side equivalent to a hinder part,
because it has many leading feet. The explanation of this is that
its flexions are not forward nor its legs turned in under (bandy).
We have given above the reason why its legs are not turned in under,
that is the hardness and shell-like character of its integument.

For these reasons then it must lead off with more than one limb, and
move obliquely; obliquely, because the flexion is oblique; and with
more than one limb, because otherwise the limbs that were still would
have got in the way of those that were moving. 

Fishes of the flat kind swim with their heads twisted, as one-eyed
men walk; they have their natural shape distorted. Web-footed birds
swim with their feet; because they breath the air and have lungs they
are bipeds, but because they have their home in the water they are
webbed; by this arrangement their feet serve them instead of fins.
They have their legs too, not like the rest of birds in the centre
of their body, but rather set back. Their legs are short, and being
set back are serviceable for swimming. The reason for their having
short legs is that nature has added to their feet by subtracting from
the length of their limbs; instead of length she gives stoutness to
the legs and breadth to the feet. Broad feet are more useful than
long for pushing away the water when they are swimming. 

Part 18

There is reason, too, for winged creatures having feet, but fish none.
The former have their home in the dry medium, and cannot remain always
in mid air; they must therefore have feet. Fish on the contrary live
in the wet medium, and take in water, not air. Fins are useful for
swimming, but feet not. And if they had both they would be non-sanguineous.
There is a broad similarity between birds and fishes in the organs
of locomotion. Birds have their wings on the superior part, similarly
fish have two pectoral fins; again, birds have legs on their under
parts and near the wings; similarly, most fish have two fins on the
under parts and near the pectorals. Birds, too, have a tail and fish
a tail-fin. 

Part 19

A difficulty may be suggested as to the movements of molluscs, that
is, as to where that movement originates; for they have no distinction
of left and right. Now observation shows them moving. We must, I think,
treat all this class as mutilated, and as moving in the way in which
limbed creatures do when one cuts off their legs, or as analogous
with the seal and the bat. Both the latter are quadrupeds but misshapen.
Now molluscs do move, but move in a manner contrary to nature. They
are not moving things, but are moving if as sedentary creatures they
are compared with zoophytes, and sedentary if classed with progressing
animals. 

As to right and left, crabs, too, show the distinction poorly, still
they do show it. You can see it in the claw; the right claw is larger
and stronger, as though the right and left sides were trying to get
distinguished. 

The structure of animals, both in their other parts, and especially
in those which concern progression and any movement in place, is as
we have now described. It remains, after determining these questions,
to investigate the problems of Life and Death. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

Our next task is to study coming-to-be and passing-away. We are to
distinguish the causes, and to state the definitions, of these processes
considered in general-as changes predicable uniformly of all the things
that come-to-be and pass-away by nature. Further, we are to study
growth and 'alteration'. We must inquire what each of them is; and
whether 'alteration' is to be identified with coming-to-be, or whether
to these different names there correspond two separate processes with
distinct natures. 

On this question, indeed, the early philosophers are divided. Some
of them assert that the so-called 'unqualified coming-to-be' is 'alteration',
while others maintain that 'alteration' and coming-to-be are distinct.
For those who say that the universe is one something (i.e. those who
generate all things out of one thing) are bound to assert that coming-to-be
is 'alteration', and that whatever 'comes-to-be' in the proper sense
of the term is 'being altered': but those who make the matter of things
more than one must distinguish coming-to-be from 'alteration'. To
this latter class belong Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and Leucippus. And
yet Anaxagoras himself failed to understand his own utterance. He
says, at all events, that coming-to-be and passing-away are the same
as 'being altered':' yet, in common with other thinkers, he affirms
that the elements are many. Thus Empedocles holds that the corporeal
elements are four, while all the elements-including those which initiate
movement-are six in number; whereas Anaxagoras agrees with Leucippus
and Democritus that the elements are infinite. 

(Anaxagoras posits as elements the 'homoeomeries', viz. bone, flesh,
marrow, and everything else which is such that part and whole are
the same in name and nature; while Democritus and Leucippus say that
there are indivisible bodies, infinite both in number and in the varieties
of their shapes, of which everything else is composed-the compounds
differing one from another according to the shapes, 'positions', and
'groupings' of their constituents.) 

For the views of the school of Anaxagoras seem diametrically opposed
to those of the followers of Empedocles. Empedocles says that Fire,
Water, Air, and Earth are four elements, and are thus 'simple' rather
than flesh, bone, and bodies which, like these, are 'homoeomeries'.
But the followers of Anaxagoras regard the 'homoeomeries' as 'simple'
and elements, whilst they affirm that Earth, Fire, Water, and Air
are composite; for each of these is (according to them) a 'common
seminary' of all the 'homoeomeries'. 

Those, then, who construct all things out of a single element, must
maintain that coming-tobe and passing-away are 'alteration'. For they
must affirm that the underlying something always remains identical
and one; and change of such a substratum is what we call 'altering'
Those, on the other hand, who make the ultimate kinds of things more
than one, must maintain that 'alteration' is distinct from coming-to-be:
for coming-to-be and passingaway result from the consilience and the
dissolution of the many kinds. That is why Empedocles too uses language
to this effect, when he says 'There is no coming-to-be of anything,
but only a mingling and a divorce of what has been mingled'. Thus
it is clear (i) that to describe coming-to-be and passing-away in
these terms is in accordance with their fundamental assumption, and
(ii) that they do in fact so describe them: nevertheless, they too
must recognize 'alteration' as a fact distinct from coming to-be,
though it is impossible for them to do so consistently with what they
say. 

That we are right in this criticism is easy to perceive. For 'alteration'
is a fact of observation. While the substance of the thing remains
unchanged, we see it 'altering' just as we see in it the changes of
magnitude called 'growth' and 'diminution'. Nevertheless, the statements
of those who posit more 'original reals' than one make 'alteration'
impossible. For 'alteration, as we assert, takes place in respect
to certain qualities: and these qualities (I mean, e.g. hot-cold,
white-black, dry-moist, soft-hard, and so forth) are, all of them,
differences characterizing the 'elements'. The actual words of Empedocles
may be quoted in illustration- 

The sun everywhere bright to see, and hot, 
The rain everywhere dark and cold; and he distinctively characterizes
his remaining elements in a similar manner. Since, therefore, it is
not possible for Fire to become Water, or Water to become Earth, neither
will it be possible for anything white to become black, or anything
soft to become hard; and the same argument applies to all the other
qualities. Yet this is what 'alteration' essentially is.

It follows, as an obvious corollary, that a single matter must always
be assumed as underlying the contrary 'poles' of any change whether
change of place, or growth and diminution, or 'alteration'; further,
that the being of this matter and the being of 'alteration' stand
and fall together. For if the change is 'alteration', then the substratum
is a single element; i.e. all things which admit of change into one
another have a single matter. And, conversely, if the substratum of
the changing things is one, there is 'alteration'. 

Empedocles, indeed, seems to contradict his own statements as well
as the observed facts. For he denies that any one of his elements
comes-to-be out of any other, insisting on the contrary that they
are the things out of which everything else comes-to-be; and yet (having
brought the entirety of existing things, except Strife, together into
one) he maintains, simultaneously with this denial, that each thing
once more comes-to-be out of the One. Hence it was clearly out of
a One that this came-to-be Water, and that Fire, various portions
of it being separated off by certain characteristic differences or
qualities-as indeed he calls the sun 'white and hot', and the earth
'heavy and hard'. If, therefore, these characteristic differences
be taken away (for they can be taken away, since they came-to-be),
it will clearly be inevitable for Earth to come to-be out of Water
and Water out of Earth, and for each of the other elements to undergo
a similar transformation-not only then, but also now-if, and because,
they change their qualities. And, to judge by what he says, the qualities
are such that they can be 'attached' to things and can again be 'separated'
from them, especially since Strife and Love are still fighting with
one another for the mastery. It was owing to this same conflict that
the elements were generated from a One at the former period. I say
'generated', for presumably Fire, Earth, and Water had no distinctive
existence at all while merged in one. 

There is another obscurity in the theory Empedocles. Are we to regard
the One as his 'original real'? Or is it the Many-i.e. Fire and Earth,
and the bodies co-ordinate with these? For the One is an 'element'
in so far as it underlies the process as matter-as that out of which
Earth and Fire come-to-be through a change of qualities due to 'the
motion'. On the other hand, in so far as the One results from composition
(by a consilience of the Many), whereas they result from disintegration
the Many are more 'elementary' than the One, and prior to it in their
nature. 

Part 2

We have therefore to discuss the whole subject of 'unqualified' coming-to-be
and passingaway; we have to inquire whether these changes do or do
not occur and, if they occur, to explain the precise conditions of
their occurrence. We must also discuss the remaining forms of change,
viz. growth and 'alteration'. For though, no doubt, Plato investigated
the conditions under which things come-to-be and pass-away, he confined
his inquiry to these changes; and he discussed not all coming-to-be,
but only that of the elements. He asked no questions as to how flesh
or bones, or any of the other similar compound things, come-to-be;
nor again did he examine the conditions under which 'alteration' or
growth are attributable to things. 

A similar criticism applies to all our predecessors with the single
exception of Democritus. Not one of them penetrated below the surface
or made a thorough examination of a single one of the problems. Democritus,
however, does seem not only to have thought carefully about all the
problems, but also to be distinguished from the outset by his method.
For, as we are saying, none of the other philosophers made any definite
statement about growth, except such as any amateur might have made.
They said that things grow 'by the accession of like to like', but
they did not proceed to explain the manner of this accession. Nor
did they give any account of 'combination': and they neglected almost
every single one of the remaining problems, offering no explanation,
e.g. of 'action' or 'passion' how in physical actions one thing acts
and the other undergoes action. Democritus and Leucippus, however,
postulate the 'figures', and make 'alteration' and coming-to-be result
from them. They explain coming-to-be and passing-away by their 'dissociation'
and 'association', but 'alteration' by their 'grouping' and 'Position'.
And since they thought that the 'truth lay in the appearance, and
the appearances are conflicting and infinitely many, they made the
'figures' infinite in number. Hence-owing to the changes of the compound-the
same thing seems different and conflicting to different people: it
is 'transposed' by a small additional ingredient, and appears utterly
other by the 'transposition' of a single constituent. For Tragedy
and Comedy are both composed of the same letters. 

Since almost all our predecessors think (i) that coming-to-be is distinct
from 'alteration', and (ii) that, whereas things 'alter' by change
of their qualities, it is by 'association' and 'dissociation' that
they come-to-be and pass-away, we must concentrate our attention on
these theses. For they lead to many perplexing and well-grounded dilemmas.
If, on the one hand, coming-to-be is 'association', many impossible
consequences result: and yet there are other arguments, not easy to
unravel, which force the conclusion upon us that coming-to-be cannot
possibly be anything else. If, on the other hand, coming-to-be is
not 'association', either there is no such thing as coming-to-be at
all or it is 'alteration': or else we must endeavour to unravel this
dilemma too-and a stubborn one we shall find it. The fundamental question,
in dealing with all these difficulties, is this: 'Do things come-to-be
and "alter" and grow, and undergo the contrary changes, because the
primary "reals" are indivisible magnitudes? Or is no magnitude indivisible?'
For the answer we give to this question makes the greatest difference.
And again, if the primary 'reals' are indivisible magnitudes, are
these bodies, as Democritus and Leucippus maintain? Or are they planes,
as is asserted in the Timaeus? 

To resolve bodies into planes and no further-this, as we have also
remarked elsewhere, in itself a paradox. Hence there is more to be
said for the view that there are indivisible bodies. Yet even these
involve much of paradox. Still, as we have said, it is possible to
construct 'alteration' and coming-to-be with them, if one 'transposes'
the same by 'turning' and 'intercontact', and by 'the varieties of
the figures', as Democritus does. (His denial of the reality of colour
is a corollary from this position: for, according to him, things get
coloured by 'turning' of the 'figures'.) But the possibility of such
a construction no longer exists for those who divide bodies into planes.
For nothing except solids results from putting planes together: they
do not even attempt to generate any quality from them. 

Lack of experience diminishes our power of taking a comprehensive
view of the admitted facts. Hence those who dwell in intimate association
with nature and its phenomena grow more and more able to formulate,
as the foundations of their theories, principles such as to admit
of a wide and coherent development: while those whom devotion to abstract
discussions has rendered unobservant of the facts are too ready to
dogmatize on the basis of a few observations. The rival treatments
of the subject now before us will serve to illustrate how great is
the difference between a 'scientific' and a 'dialectical' method of
inquiry. For, whereas the Platonists argue that there must be atomic
magnitudes 'because otherwise "The Triangle" will be more than one',
Democritus would appear to have been convinced by arguments appropriate
to the subject, i.e. drawn from the science of nature. Our meaning
will become clear as we proceed. For to suppose that a body (i.e.
a magnitude) is divisible through and through, and that this division
is possible, involves a difficulty. What will there be in the body
which escapes the division? 

If it is divisible through and through, and if this division is possible,
then it might be, at one and the same moment, divided through and
through, even though the dividings had not been effected simultaneously:
and the actual occurrence of this result would involve no impossibility.
Hence the same principle will apply whenever a body is by nature divisible
through and through, whether by bisection, or generally by any method
whatever: nothing impossible will have resulted if it has actually
been divided-not even if it has been divided into innumerable parts,
themselves divided innumerable times. Nothing impossible will have
resulted, though perhaps nobody in fact could so divide it.

Since, therefore, the be dy is divisible through and through, let
it have been divided. What, then, will remain? A magnitude? No: that
is impossible, since then there will be something not divided, whereas
ex hypothesis the body was divisible through and through. But if it
be admitted that neither a body nor a magnitude will remain, and yet
division is to take place, the constituents of the body will either
be points (i.e. without magnitude) or absolutely nothing. If its constituents
are nothings, then it might both come-to-be out of nothings and exist
as a composite of nothings: and thus presumably the whole body will
be nothing but an appearance. But if it consists of points, a similar
absurdity will result: it will not possess any magnitude. For when
the points were in contact and coincided to form a single magnitude,
they did not make the whole any bigger (since, when the body was divided
into two or more parts, the whole was not a bit smaller or bigger
than it was before the division): hence, even if all the points be
put together, they will not make any magnitude. 

But suppose that, as the body is being divided, a minute section-a
piece of sawdust, as it were-is extracted, and that in this sense-a
body 'comes away' from the magnitude, evading the division. Even then
the same argument applies. For in what sense is that section divisible?
But if what 'came away' was not a body but a separable form or quality,
and if the magnitude is 'points or contacts thus qualified': it is
paradoxical that a magnitude should consist of elements, which are
not magnitudes. Moreover, where will the points be? And are they motionless
or moving? And every contact is always a contact of two somethings,
i.e. there is always something besides the contact or the division
or the point. 

These, then, are the difficulties resulting from the supposition that
any and every body, whatever its size, is divisible through and through.
There is, besides, this further consideration. If, having divided
a piece of wood or anything else, I put it together, it is again equal
to what it was, and is one. Clearly this is so, whatever the point
at which I cut the wood. The wood, therefore, has been divided potentially
through and through. What, then, is there in the wood besides the
division? For even if we suppose there is some quality, yet how is
the wood dissolved into such constituents and how does it come-to-be
out of them? Or how are such constituents separated so as to exist
apart from one another? Since, therefore, it is impossible for magnitudes
to consist of contacts or points, there must be indivisible bodies
and magnitudes. Yet, if we do postulate the latter, we are confronted
with equally impossible consequences, which we have examined in other
works.' But we must try to disentangle these perplexities, and must
therefore formulate the whole problem over again. 

On the one hand, then, it is in no way paradoxical that every perceptible
body should be indivisible as well as divisible at any and every point.
For the second predicate will at. tach to it potentially, but the
first actually. On the other hand, it would seem to be impossible
for a body to be, even potentially, divisible at all points simultaneously.
For if it were possible, then it might actually occur, with the result,
not that the body would simultaneously be actually both (indivisible
and divided), but that it would be simultaneously divided at any and
every point. Consequently, nothing will remain and the body will have
passed-away into what is incorporeal: and so it might come-to-be again
either out of points or absolutely out of nothing. And how is that
possible? 

But now it is obvious that a body is in fact divided into separable
magnitudes which are smaller at each division-into magnitudes which
fall apart from one another and are actually separated. Hence (it
is urged) the process of dividing a body part by part is not a 'breaking
up' which could continue ad infinitum; nor can a body be simultaneously
divided at every point, for that is not possible; but there is a limit,
beyond which the 'breaking up' cannot proceed. The necessary consequence-especially
if coming-to-be and passing-away are to take place by 'association'
and 'dissociation' respectively-is that a body must contain atomic
magnitudes which are invisible. Such is the argument which is believed
to establish the necessity of atomic magnitudes: we must now show
that it conceals a faulty inference, and exactly where it conceals
it. 

For, since point is not 'immediately-next' to point, magnitudes are
'divisible through and through' in one sense, and yet not in another.
When, however, it is admitted that a magnitude is 'divisible through
and through', it is thought there is a point not only anywhere, but
also everywhere, in it: hence it is supposed to follow, from the admission,
that the magnitude must be divided away into nothing. For it is supposed-there
is a point everywhere within it, so that it consists either of contacts
or of points. But it is only in one sense that the magnitude is 'divisible
through and through', viz. in so far as there is one point anywhere
within it and all its points are everywhere within it if you take
them singly one by one. But there are not more points than one anywhere
within it, for the points are not 'consecutive': hence it is not simultaneously
'divisible through and through'. For if it were, then, if it be divisible
at its centre, it will be divisible also at a point 'immediately-next'
to its centre. But it is not so divisible: for position is not 'immediately-next'
to position, nor point to point-in other words, division is not 'immediately-next'
to division, nor composition to composition. 

Hence there are both 'association' and 'dissociation', though neither
(a) into, and out of, atomic magnitudes (for that involves many impossibilities),
nor (b) so that division takes place through and through-for this
would have resulted only if point had been 'immediately-next' to point:
but 'dissociation' takes place into small (i.e. relatively small)
parts, and 'association' takes place out of relatively small parts.

It is wrong, however, to suppose, as some assert, that coming-to-be
and passing-away in the unqualified and complete sense are distinctively
defined by 'association' and 'dissociation', while the change that
takes place in what is continuous is 'alteration'. On the contrary,
this is where the whole error lies. For unqualified coming-to-be and
passing-away are not effected by 'association' and 'dissociation'.
They take place when a thing changes, from this to that, as a whole.
But the philosophers we are criticizing suppose that all such change
is 'alteration': whereas in fact there is a difference. For in that
which underlies the change there is a factor corresponding to the
definition and there is a material factor. When, then, the change
is in these constitutive factors, there will be coming-to-be or passing-away:
but when it is in the thing's qualities, i.e. a change of the thing
per accidents, there will be 'alteration'. 

'Dissociation' and 'association' affect the thing's susceptibility
to passing-away. For if water has first been 'dissociated' into smallish
drops, air comes-to-be out of it more quickly: while, if drops of
water have first been 'associated', air comes-to-be more slowly. Our
doctrine will become clearer in the sequel.' Meantime, so much may
be taken as established-viz. that coming-to-be cannot be 'association',
at least not the kind of 'association' some philosophers assert it
to be. 

Part 3

Now that we have established the preceding distinctions, we must first
consider whether there is anything which comes-to-be and passes-away
in the unqualified sense: or whether nothing comes-to-be in this strict
sense, but everything always comes-to-be something and out of something-I
mean, e.g. comes-to-be-healthy out of being-ill and ill out of being-healthy,
comes-to-be-small out of being big and big out of being-small, and
so on in every other instance. For if there is to be coming-to-be
without qualification, 'something' must-without qualification-'come-to-be
out of not-being', so that it would be true to say that 'not-being
is an attribute of some things'. For qualified coming-to-be is a process
out of qualified not-being (e.g. out of not-white or not-beautiful),
but unqualified coming-to-be is a process out of unqualified not-being.

Now 'unqulified' means either (i) the primary predication within each
Category, or (ii) the universal, i.e. the all-comprehensive, predication.
Hence, if'unqualified not-being 'means the negation of 'being' in
the sense of the primary term of the Category in question, we shall
have, in 'unqualified coming-to-be', a coming-to-be of a substance
out of not-substance. But that which is not a substance or a 'this'
clearly cannot possess predicates drawn from any of the other Categories
either-e.g. we cannot attribute to it any quality, quantity, or position.
Otherwise, properties would admit of existence in separation from
substances. If, on the other hand, 'unqualified not-being' means 'what
is not in any sense at all', it will be a universal negation of all
forms of being, so that what comes-to-be will have to come-to-be out
of nothing. 

Although we have dealt with these problems at greater length in another
work,where we have set forth the difficulties and established the
distinguishing definitions, the following concise restatement of our
results must here be offered: In one sense things come-to-be out of
that which has no 'being' without qualification: yet in another sense
they come-to-be always out of what is'. For coming-to-be necessarily
implies the pre-existence of something which potentially 'is', but
actually 'is not'; and this something is spoken of both as 'being'
and as 'not-being'. 

These distinctions may be taken as established: but even then it is
extraordinarily difficult to see how there can be 'unqualified coming-to-be'
(whether we suppose it to occur out of what potentially 'is', or in
some other way), and we must recall this problem for further examination.
For the question might be raised whether substance (i.e. the 'this')
comes-to-be at all. Is it not rather the 'such', the 'so great', or
the 'somewhere', which comes-to-be? And the same question might be
raised about 'passing-away' also. For if a substantial thing comes-to-be,
it is clear that there will 'be' (not actually, but potentially) a
substance, out of which its coming-to-be will proceed and into which
the thing that is passing-away will necessarily change. Then will
any predicate belonging to the remaining Categories attach actually
to this presupposed substance? In other words, will that which is
only potentially a 'this' (which only potentially is), while without
the qualification 'potentially' it is not a 'this' (i.e. is not),
possess, e.g. any determinate size or quality or position? For (i)
if it possesses none of these determinations actually, but all of
them only potentially, the result is first that a being, which is
not a determinate being, is capable of separate existence; and in
addition that coming-to-be proceeds out of nothing pre-existing-a
thesis which, more than any other, preoccupied and alarmed the earliest
philosophers. On the other hand (ii) if, although it is not a 'this
somewhat' or a substance, it is to possess some of the remaining determinations
quoted above, then (as we said)' properties will be separable from
substances. 

We must therefore concentrate all our powers on the discussion of
these difficulties and on the solution of a further question-viz.
What is the cause of the perpetuity of coming-to-be? Why is there
always unqualified, as well as partial, coming-to-be? Cause' in this
connexion has two senses. It means (i) the source from which, as we
say, the process 'originates', and (ii) the matter. It is the material
cause that we have here to state. For, as to the other cause, we have
already explained (in our treatise on Motion that it involves (a)
something immovable through all time and (b) something always being
moved. And the accurate treatment of the first of these-of the immovable
'originative source'-belongs to the province of the other, or 'prior',
philosophy: while as regards 'that which sets everything else in motion
by being itself continuously moved', we shall have to explain later'
which amongst the so-called 'specific' causes exhibits this character.
But at present we are to state the material cause-the cause classed
under the head of matter-to which it is due that passing-away and
coming-to-be never fail to occur in Nature. For perhaps, if we succeed
in clearing up this question, it will simultaneously become clear
what account we ought to give of that which perplexed us just now,
i.e. of unqualified passingaway and coming-to-be. 

Our new question too-viz. 'what is the cause of the unbroken continuity
of coming-to-be?'-is sufficiently perplexing, if in fact what passes-away
vanishes into 'what is not' and 'what is not' is nothing (since 'what
is not' is neither a thing, nor possessed of a quality or quantity,
nor in any place). If, then, some one of the things 'which are' constantly
disappearing, why has not the whole of 'what is' been used up long
ago and vanished away assuming of course that the material of all
the several comings-to-be was finite? For, presumably, the unfailing
continuity of coming-to-be cannot be attributed to the infinity of
the material. That is impossible, for nothing is actually infinite.
A thing is infinite only potentially, i.e. the dividing of it can
continue indefinitely: so that we should have to suppose there is
only one kind of coming-to-be in the world-viz. one which never fails,
because it is such that what comes-to-be is on each successive occasion
smaller than before. But in fact this is not what we see occurring.

Why, then, is this form of change necessarily ceaseless? Is it because
the passing-away of this is a coming-to-be of something else, and
the coming-to-be of this a passing-away of something else?

The cause implied in this solution must no doubt be considered adequate
to account for coming-to-be and passing-away in their general character
as they occur in all existing things alike. Yet, if the same process
is a coming to-be of this but a passing-away of that, and a passing-away
of this but a coming-to-be of that, why are some things said to come-to-be
and pass-away without qualification, but others only with a qualification?

The distinction must be investigated once more, for it demands some
explanation. (It is applied in a twofold manner.) For (i) we say 'it
is now passing-away' without qualification, and not merely 'this is
passing-away': and we call this change 'coming-to-be', and that 'passing-away',
without qualification. And (ii) so-and-so 'comes-to-be-something',
but does not 'come-to-be' without qualification; for we say that the
student 'comes-to-be-learned', not 'comes-to-be' without qualification.

(i) Now we often divide terms into those which signify a 'this somewhat'
and those which do not. And (the first form of) the distinction, which
we are investigating, results from a similar division of terms: for
it makes a difference into what the changing thing changes. Perhaps,
e.g. the passage into Fire is 'coming-to-be' unqualified, but 'passingaway-of-something'
(e.g. Earth): whilst the coming-to-be of Earth is qualified (not unqualified)
'coming-to-be', though unqualified 'passing-away' (e.g. of Fire).
This would be the case on the theory set forth in Parmenides: for
he says that the things into which change takes place are two, and
he asserts that these two, viz. what is and what is not, are Fire
and Earth. Whether we postulate these, or other things of a similar
kind, makes no difference. For we are trying to discover not what
undergoes these changes, but what is their characteristic manner.
The passage, then, into what 'is' not except with a qualification
is unqualified passing-away, while the passage into what 'is' without
qualification is unqualified coming-to-be. Hence whatever the contrasted
'poles' of the changes may be whether Fire and Earth, or some other
couple-the one of them will be 'a being' and the other 'a not-being'.

We have thus stated one characteristic manner in which unqualified
will be distinguished from qualified coming-to-be and passing-away:
but they are also distinguished according to the special nature of
the material of the changing thing. For a material, whose constitutive
differences signify more a 'this somewhat', is itself more 'substantial'
or 'real': while a material, whose constitutive differences signify
privation, is 'not real'. (Suppose, e.g. that 'the hot' is a positive
predication, i.e. a 'form', whereas 'cold' is a privation, and that
Earth and Fire differ from one another by these constitutive differences.)

The opinion, however, which most people are inclined to prefer, is
that the distinction depends upon the difference between 'the perceptible'
and 'the imperceptible'. Thus, when there is a change into perceptible
material, people say there is 'coming-to-be'; but when there is a
change into invisible material, they call it 'passing-away'. For they
distinguish 'what is' and 'what is not' by their perceiving and not-perceiving,
just as what is knowable 'is' and what is unknowable 'is not'-perception
on their view having the force of knowledge. Hence, just as they deem
themselves to live and to 'be' in virtue of their perceiving or their
capacity to perceive, so too they deem the things to 'be' qua perceived
or perceptible-and in this they are in a sense on the track of the
truth, though what they actually say is not true. 

Thus unqualified coming-to-be and passingaway turn out to be different
according to common opinion from what they are in truth. For Wind
and Air are in truth more real more a 'this somewhat' or a 'form'-than
Earth. But they are less real to perception which explains why things
are commonly said to 'pass-away' without qualification when they change
into Wind and Air, and to 'come-to-be' when they change into what
is tangible, i.e. into Earth. 

We have now explained why there is 'unqualified coming-to-be' (though
it is a passingaway-of-something) and 'unqualified passingaway (though
it is a coming-to-be-of-something). For this distinction of appellation
depends upon a difference in the material out of which, and into which,
the changes are effected. It depends either upon whether the material
is or is not 'substantial', or upon whether it is more or less 'substantial',
or upon whether it is more or less perceptible. 

(ii) But why are some things said to 'come to-be' without qualification,
and others only to 'come-to-be-so-and-so', in cases different from
the one we have been considering where two things come-to-be reciprocally
out of one another? For at present we have explained no more than
this:-why, when two things change reciprocally into one another, we
do not attribute coming-to-be and passing-away uniformly to them both,
although every coming-to-be is a passing-away of something else and
every passing-away some other thing's coming-to-be. But the question
subsequently formulated involves a different problem-viz. why, although
the learning thing is said to 'come-to-be-learned' but not to 'come-tobe'
without qualification, yet the growing thing is said to 'come-to-be'.

The distinction here turns upon the difference of the Categories.
For some things signify a this somewhat, others a such, and others
a so-much. Those things, then, which do not signify substance, are
not said to 'come-to-be' without qualification, but only to 'come-to-be-so-and-so'.
Nevertheless, in all changing things alike, we speak of 'coming-to-be'
when the thing comes-to-be something in one of the two Columns-e.g.
in Substance, if it comes-to-be Fire but not if it comes-to-be Earth;
and in Quality, if it comes-to-be learned but not when it comes-to-be
ignorant. 

We have explained why some things come to-be without qualification,
but not others both in general, and also when the changing things
are substances and nothing else; and we have stated that the substratum
is the material cause of the continuous occurrence of coming to-be,
because it is such as to change from contrary to contrary and because,
in substances, the coming-to-be of one thing is always a passing-away
of another, and the passing-away of one thing is always another's
coming-to-be. But there is no need even to discuss the other question
we raised-viz. why coming-to-be continues though things are constantly
being destroyed. For just as people speak of 'a passing-away' without
qualification when a thing has passed into what is imperceptible and
what in that sense 'is not', so also they speak of 'a coming-to-be
out of a not-being' when a thing emerges from an imperceptible. Whether,
therefore, the substratum is or is not something, what comes-tobe
emerges out of a 'not-being': so that a thing comes-to-be out of a
not-being' just as much as it 'passes-away into what is not'. Hence
it is reasonable enough that coming-to-be should never fail. For coming-to-be
is a passing-away of 'what is not' and passing-away is a coming to-be
of 'what is not'. 

But what about that which 'is' not except with a qualification? Is
it one of the two contrary poles of the chang-e.g. Earth (i.e. the
heavy) a 'not-being', but Fire (i.e. the light) a 'being'? Or, on
the contrary, does what is 'include Earth as well as Fire, whereas
what is not' is matter-the matter of Earth and Fire alike? And again,
is the matter of each different? Or is it the same, since otherwise
they would not come-to-be reciprocally out of one another, i.e. contraries
out of contraries? For these things-Fire, Earth, Water, Air-are characterized
by 'the contraries'. 

Perhaps the solution is that their matter is in one sense the same,
but in another sense different. For that which underlies them, whatever
its nature may be qua underlying them, is the same: but its actual
being is not the same. So much, then, on these topics. 

Part 4

Next we must state what the difference is between coming-to-be and
'alteration'-for we maintain that these changes are distinct from
one another. 

Since, then, we must distinguish (a) the substratum, and (b) the property
whose nature it is to be predicated of the substratum; and since change
of each of these occurs; there is 'alteration' when the substratum
is perceptible and persists, but changes in its own properties, the
properties in question being opposed to one another either as contraries
or as intermediates. The body, e.g. although persisting as the same
body, is now healthy and now ill; and the bronze is now spherical
and at another time angular, and yet remains the same bronze. But
when nothing perceptible persists in its identity as a substratum,
and the thing changes as a whole (when e.g. the seed as a whole is
converted into blood, or water into air, or air as a whole into water),
such an occurrence is no longer 'alteration'. It is a coming-to-be
of one substance and a passing-away of the other-especially if the
change proceeds from an imperceptible something to something perceptible
(either to touch or to all the senses), as when water comes-to-be
out of, or passes-away into, air: for air is pretty well imperceptible.
If, however, in such cases, any property (being one of a pair of contraries)
persists, in the thing that has come-to-be, the same as it was in
the thing which has passedaway-if, e.g. when water comes-to-be out
of air, both are transparent or cold-the second thing, into which
the first changes, must not be a property of this persistent identical
something. Otherwise the change will be 'alteration.' Suppose, e.g.
that the musical man passed-away and an unmusical man came-tobe, and
that the man persists as something identical. Now, if 'musicalness
and unmusicalness' had not been a property essentially inhering in
man, these changes would have been a coming-to-be of unmusicalness
and a passing-away of musicalness: but in fact 'musicalness and unmusicalness'
are a property of the persistent identity, viz. man. (Hence, as regards
man, these changes are 'modifications'; though, as regards musical
man and unmusical man, they are a passing-away and a coming-to-be.)
Consequently such changes are 'alteration.' When the change from contrary
to contrary is in quantity, it is 'growth and diminution'; when it
is in place, it is 'motion'; when it is in property, i.e. in quality,
it is 'alteration': but, when nothing persists, of which the resultant
is a property (or an 'accident' in any sense of the term), it is 'coming-to-be',
and the converse change is 'passing-away'. 

'Matter', in the most proper sense of the term, is to be identified
with the substratum which is receptive of coming-to-be and passingaway:
but the substratum of the remaining kinds of change is also, in a
certain sense, 'matter', because all these substrata are receptive
of 'contrarieties' of some kind. So much, then, as an answer to the
questions (i) whether coming-to-be 'is' or 'is not'-i.e. what are
the precise conditions of its occurrence and (ii) what 'alteration'
is: but we have still to treat of growth. 

Part 5

We must explain (i) wherein growth differs from coming-to-be and from
'alteration', and ii) what is the process of growing and the sprocess
of diminishing in each and all of the things that grow and diminish.

Hence our first question is this: Do these changes differ from one
another solely because of a difference in their respective 'spheres'?
In other words, do they differ because, while a change from this to
that (viz. from potential to actual substance) is coming-to-be, a
change in the sphere of magnitude is growth and one in the sphere
of quality is 'alteration'-both growth and 'alteration' being changes
from what is-potentially to what is-actually magnitude and quality
respectively? Or is there also a difference in the manner of the change,
since it is evident that, whereas neither what is 'altering' nor what
is coming-to-be necessarily changes its place, what is growing or
diminishing changes its spatial position of necessity, though in a
different manner from that in which the moving thing does so? For
that which is being moved changes its place as a whole: but the growing
thing changes its place like a metal that is being beaten, retaining
its position as a whole while its parts change their places. They
change their places, but not in the same way as the parts of a revolving
globe. For the parts of the globe change their places while the whole
continues to occupy an equal place: but the parts of the rowing thing
expand over an ever-increasing place and the parts of the diminishing
thing contract within an ever-diminishing area. 

It is clear, then, that these changes-the changes of that which is
coming-to-be, of that which is 'altering', and of that which is growing-differ
in manner as well as in sphere. But how are we to conceive the 'sphere'
of the change which is growth and diminution? The sphere' of growing
and diminishing is believed to be magnitude. Are we to suppose that
body and magnitude come-to-be out of something which, though potentially
magnitude and body, is actually incorporeal and devoid of magnitude?
And since this description may be understood in two different ways,
in which of these two ways are we to apply it to the process of growth?
Is the matter, out of which growth takes place, (i) 'separate' and
existing alone by itself, or (ii) 'separate' but contained in another
body? 

Perhaps it is impossible for growth to take place in either of these
ways. For since the matter is 'separate', either (a) it will occupy
no place (as if it were a point), or (b) it will be a 'void', i.e.
a non-perceptible body. But the first of these alternatives is impossible.
For since what comes-to-be out of this incorporeal and sizeless something
will always be 'somewhere', it too must be 'somewhere'-either intrinsically
or indirectly. And the second alternative necessarily implies that
the matter is contained in some other body. But if it is to be 'in'
another body and yet remains 'separate' in such a way that it is in
no sense a part of that body (neither a part of its substantial being
nor an 'accident' of it), many impossibilities will result. It is
as if we were to suppose that when, e.g. air comes-to-be out of water
the process were due not to a change of the but to the matter of the
air being 'contained in' the water as in a vessel. This is impossible.
For (i) there is nothing to prevent an indeterminate number of matters
being thus 'contained in' the water, so that they might come-to-be
actually an indeterminate quantity of air; and (ii) we do not in fact
see air coming-to-be out of water in this fashion, viz. withdrawing
out of it and leaving it unchanged. 

It is therefore better to suppose that in all instances of coming-to-be
the matter is inseparable, being numerically identical and one with
the 'containing' body, though isolable from it by definition. But
the same reasons also forbid us to regard the matter, out of which
the body comes-to-be, as points or lines. The matter is that of which
points and lines are limits, and it is something that can never exist
without quality and without form. 

Now it is no doubt true, as we have also established elsewhere,' that
one thing 'comes-tobe' (in the unqualified sense) out of another thing:
and further it is true that the efficient cause of its coming-to-be
is either (i) an actual thing (which is the same as the effect either
generically-or the efficient cause of the coming-to-be of a hard thing
is not a hard thing or specifically, as e.g. fire is the efficient
cause of the coming-to-be of fire or one man of the birth of another),
or (ii) an actuality. Nevertheless, since there is also a matter out
of which corporeal substance itself comes-to-be (corporeal substance,
however, already characterized as such-and-such a determinate body,
for there is no such thing as body in general), this same matter is
also the matter of magnitude and quality-being separable from these
matters by definition, but not separable in place unless Qualities
are, in their turn, separable. 

It is evident, from the preceding development and discussion of difficulties,
that growth is not a change out of something which, though potentially
a magnitude, actually possesses no magnitude. For, if it were, the
'void' would exist in separation; but we have explained in a former
work' that this is impossible. Moreover, a change of that kind is
not peculiarly distinctive of growth, but characterizes coming-to-be
as such or in general. For growth is an increase, and diminution is
a lessening, of the magnitude which is there already-that, indeed,
is why the growing thing must possess some magnitude. Hence growth
must not be regarded as a process from a matter without magnitude
to an actuality of magnitude: for this would be a body's coming-to-be
rather than its growth. 

We must therefore come to closer quarters with the subject of our
inquiry. We must grapple' with it (as it were) from its beginning,
and determine the precise character of the growing and diminishing
whose causes we are investigating. 

It is evident (i) that any and every part of the growing thing has
increased, and that similarly in diminution every part has become
smaller: also (ii) that a thing grows by the accession, and diminishes
by the departure, of something. Hence it must grow by the accession
either (a) of something incorporeal or (b) of a body. Now, if (a)
it grows by the accession of something incorporeal, there will exist
separate a void: but (as we have stated before)' is impossible for
a matter of magnitude to exist 'separate'. If, on the other hand (b)
it grows by the accession of a body, there will be two bodies-that
which grows and that which increases it-in the same place: and this
too is impossible. 

But neither is it open to us to say that growth or diminution occurs
in the way in which e.g. air is generated from water. For, although
the volume has then become greater, the change will not be growth,
but a coming to-be of the one-viz. of that into which the change is
taking place-and a passing-away of the contrasted body. It is not
a growth of either. Nothing grows in the process; unless indeed there
be something common to both things (to that which is coming-to-be
and to that which passed-away), e.g. 'body', and this grows. The water
has not grown, nor has the air: but the former has passed-away and
the latter has come-to-be, and-if anything has grown-there has been
a growth of 'body.' Yet this too is impossible. For our account of
growth must preserve the characteristics of that which is growing
and diminishing. And these characteristics are three: (i) any and
every part of the growing magnitude is made bigger (e.g. if flesh
grows, every particle of the flesh gets bigger), (ii) by the accession
of something, and (iii) in such a way that the growing thing is preserved
and persists. For whereas a thing does not persist in the processes
of unqualified coming-to-be or passing-away, that which grows or 'alters'
persists in its identity through the 'altering' and through the growing
or diminishing, though the quality (in 'alteration') and the size
(in growth) do not remain the same. Now if the generation of air from
water is to be regarded as growth, a thing might grow without the
accession (and without the persistence) of anything, and diminish
without the departure of anything-and that which grows need not persist.
But this characteristic must be preserved: for the growth we are discussing
has been assumed to be thus characterized. 

One might raise a further difficulty. What is 'that which grows'?
Is it that to which something is added? If, e.g. a man grows in his
shin, is it the shin which is greater-but not that 'whereby' he grows,
viz. not the food? Then why have not both 'grown'? For when A is added
to B, both A and B are greater, as when you mix wine with water; for
each ingredient is alike increased in volume. Perhaps the explanation
is that the substance of the one remains unchanged, but the substance
of the other (viz. of the food) does not. For indeed, even in the
mixture of wine and water, it is the prevailing ingredient which is
said to have increased in volume. We say, e.g. that the wine has increased,
because the whole mixture acts as wine but not as water. A similar
principle applies also to 'alteration'. Flesh is said to have been
'altered' if, while its character and substance remain, some one of
its essential properties, which was not there before, now qualifies
it: on the other hand, that 'whereby' it has been 'altered' may have
undergone no change, though sometimes it too has been affected. The
altering agent, however, and the originative source of the process
are in the growing thing and in that which is being 'altered': for
the efficient cause is in these. No doubt the food, which has come
in, may sometimes expand as well as the body that has consumed it
(that is so, e.g. if, after having come in, a food is converted into
wind), but when it has undergone this change it has passedaway: and
the efficient cause is not in the food. 

We have now developed the difficulties sufficiently and must therefore
try to find a solution of the problem. Our solution must preserve
intact the three characteristics of growth-that the growing thing
persists, that it grows by the accession (and diminishes by the departure)
of something, and further that every perceptible particle of it has
become either larger or smaller. We must recognize also (a) that the
growing body is not 'void' and that yet there are not two magnitudes
in the same place, and (b) that it does not grow by the accession
of something incorporeal. 

Two preliminary distinctions will prepare us to grasp the cause of
growth. We must note (i) that the organic parts grow by the growth
of the tissues (for every organ is composed of these as its constituents);
and (ii) that flesh, bone, and every such part-like every other thing
which has its form immersed in matter-has a twofold nature: for the
form as well as the matter is called 'flesh' or 'bone'. 

Now, that any and every part of the tissue qua form should grow-and
grow by the accession of something-is possible, but not that any and
every part of the tissue qua matter should do so. For we must think
of the tissue after the image of flowing water that is measured by
one and the same measure: particle after particle comes-to-be, and
each successive particle is different. And it is in this sense that
the matter of the flesh grows, some flowing out and some flowing in
fresh; not in the sense that fresh matter accedes to every particle
of it. There is, however, an accession to every part of its figure
or 'form'. 

That growth has taken place proportionally, is more manifest in the
organic parts-e.g. in the hand. For there the fact that the matter
is distinct from the form is more manifest than in flesh, i.e. than
in the tissues. That is why there is a greater tendency to suppose
that a corpse still possesses flesh and bone than that it still has
a hand or an arm. 

Hence in one sense it is true that any and every part of the flesh
has grown; but in another sense it is false. For there has been an
accession to every part of the flesh in respect to its form, but not
in respect to its matter. The whole, however, has become larger. And
this increase is due (a) on the one hand to the accession of something,
which is called 'food' and is said to be 'contrary' to flesh, but
(b) on the other hand to the transformation of this food into the
same form as that of flesh as if, e.g. 'moist' were to accede to 'dry'
and, having acceded, were to be transformed and to become 'dry'. For
in one sense 'Like grows by Like', but in another sense 'Unlike grows
by Unlike'. 

One might discuss what must be the character of that 'whereby' a thing
grows. Clearly it must be potentially that which is growing-potentially
flesh, e.g. if it is flesh that is growing. Actually, therefore, it
must be 'other' than the growing thing. This 'actual other', then,
has passed-away and come-to-be flesh. But it has not been transformed
into flesh alone by itself (for that would have been a coming-to-be,
not a growth): on the contrary, it is the growing thing which has
come-to-be flesh (and grown) by the food. In what way, then, has the
food been modified by the growing thing? Perhaps we should say that
it has been 'mixed' with it, as if one were to pour water into wine
and the wine were able to convert the new ingredient into wine. And
as fire lays hold of the inflammable, so the active principle of growth,
dwelling in the growing thing that which is actually flesh), lays
hold of an acceding food which is potentially flesh and converts it
into actual flesh. The acceding food, therefore, must be together
with the growing thing: for if it were apart from it, the change would
be a coming-to-be. For it is possible to produce fire by piling logs
on to the already burning fire. That is 'growth'. But when the logs
themselves are set on fire, that is 'coming-to-be'. 

'Quantum-in-general' does not come-to-be any more than 'animal' which
is neither man nor any other of the specific forms of animal: what
'animal-in-general' is in coming-to-be, that 'quantum-in-general'
is in growth. But what does come-to-be in growth is flesh or bone-or
a hand or arm (i.e. the tissues of these organic parts). Such things
come-to-be, then, by the accession not of quantified-flesh but of
a quantified-something. In so far as this acceding food is potentially
the double result e.g. is potentially so-much-flesh-it produces growth:
for it is bound to become actually both so-much and flesh. But in
so far as it is potentially flesh only, it nourishes: for it is thus
that 'nutrition' and 'growth' differ by their definition. That is
why a body's' nutrition' continues so long as it is kept alive (even
when it is diminishing), though not its 'growth'; and why nutrition,
though 'the same' as growth, is yet different from it in its actual
being. For in so far as that which accedes is potentially 'so much-flesh'
it tends to increase flesh: whereas, in so far as it is potentially
'flesh' only, it is nourishment. 

The form of which we have spoken is a kind of power immersed in matter-a
duct, as it were. If, then, a matter accedes-a matter, which is potentially
a duct and also potentially possesses determinate quantity the ducts
to which it accedes will become bigger. But if it is no longer able
to act-if it has been weakened by the continued influx of matter,
just as water, continually mixed in greater and greater quantity with
wine, in the end makes the wine watery and converts it into water-then
it will cause a diminution of the quantum; though still the form persists.

Part 6

(In discussing the causes of coming-tobe) we must first investigate
the matter, i.e. the so-called 'elements'. We must ask whether they
really are clements or not, i.e. whether each of them is eternal or
whether there is a sense in which they come-to-be: and, if they do
come-to-be, whether all of them come-to-be in the same manner reciprocally
out of one another, or whether one amongst them is something primary.
Hence we must begin by explaining certain preliminary matters, about
which the statements now current are vague. 

For all (the pluralist philosophers)- those who generate the 'elements'
as well as those who generate the bodies that are compounded of the
elements- make use of 'dissociation' and 'association', and of 'action'
and 'passion'. Now 'association' is 'combination'; but the precise
meaning of the process we call 'combining' has not been explained.
Again, (all the monists make use of 'alteration': but) without an
agent and a patient there cannot be 'altering' any more than there
can be 'dissociating' and 'associating'. For not only those who postulate
a plurality of elements employ their reciprocal action and passion
to generate the compounds: those who derive things from a single element
are equally compelled to introduce 'acting'. And in this respect Diogenes
is right when he argues that 'unless all things were derived from
one, reciprocal action and passion could not have occurred'. The hot
thing, e.g. would not be cooled and the cold thing in turn be warmed:
for heat and cold do not change reciprocally into one another, but
what changes (it is clear) is the substratum. Hence, whenever there
is action and passion between two things, that which underlies them
must be a single something. No doubt, it is not true to say that all
things are of this character: but it is true of all things between
which there is reciprocal action and passion. 

But if we must investigate 'action-passion' and 'combination', we
must also investigate 'contact'. For action and passion (in the proper
sense of the terms) can only occur between things which are such as
to touch one another; nor can things enter into combination at all
unless they have come into a certain kind of contact. Hence we must
give a definite account of these three things- of 'contact', 'combination',
and 'acting'. 

Let us start as follows. All things which admit of 'combination' must
be capable of reciprocal contact: and the same is true of any two
things, of which one 'acts' and the other 'suffers action' in the
proper sense of the terms. For this reason we must treat of 'contact'
first. every term which possesses a variety of meaning includes those
various meanings either owing to a mere coincidence of language, or
owing to a real order of derivation in the different things to which
it is applied: but, though this may be taken to hold of 'contact'
as of all such terms, it is nevertheless true that contact' in the
proper sense applies only to things which have 'position'. And 'position'
belongs only to those things which also have a Place': for in so far
as we attribute 'contact' to the mathematical things, we must also
attribute 'place' to them, whether they exist in separation or in
some other fashion. Assuming, therefore, that 'to touch' is-as we
have defined it in a previous work'-'to have the extremes together',
only those things will touch one another which, being separate magnitudes
and possessing position, have their extremes 'together'. And since
position belongs only to those things which also have a 'place', while
the primary differentiation of 'place' is the above' and 'the below'
(and the similar pairs of opposites), all things which touch one another
will have 'weight' or 'lightness' either both these qualities or one
or the other of them. But bodies which are heavy or light are such
as to 'act' and 'suffer action'. Hence it is clear that those things
are by nature such as to touch one another, which (being separate
magnitudes) have their extremes 'together' and are able to move, and
be moved by, one another. 

The manner in which the 'mover' moves the moved' not always the same:
on the contrary, whereas one kind of 'mover' can only impart motion
by being itself moved, another kind can do so though remaining itself
unmoved. Clearly therefore we must recognize a corresponding variety
in speaking of the 'acting' thing too: for the 'mover' is said to
'act' (in a sense) and the 'acting' thing to 'impart motion'. Nevertheless
there is a difference and we must draw a distinction. For not every
'mover' can 'act', if (a) the term 'agent' is to be used in contrast
to 'patient' and (b) 'patient' is to be applied only to those things
whose motion is a 'qualitative affection'-i.e. a quality, like white'
or 'hot', in respect to which they are moved' only in the sense that
they are 'altered': on the contrary, to 'impart motion' is a wider
term than to 'act'. Still, so much, at any rate, is clear: the things
which are 'such as to impart motion', if that description be interpreted
in one sense, will touch the things which are 'such as to be moved
by them'-while they will not touch them, if the description be interpreted
in a different sense. But the disjunctive definition of 'touching'
must include and distinguish (a) 'contact in general' as the relation
between two things which, having position, are such that one is able
to impart motion and the other to be moved, and (b) 'reciprocal contact'
as the relation between two things, one able to impart motion and
the other able to be moved in such a way that 'action and passion'
are predicable of them. 

As a rule, no doubt, if A touches B, B touches A. For indeed practically
all the 'movers' within our ordinary experience impart motion by being
moved: in their case, what touches inevitably must, and also evidently
does, touch something which reciprocally touches it. Yet, if A moves
B, it is possible-as we sometimes express it-for A 'merely to touch'
B, and that which touches need not touch a something which touches
it. Nevertheless it is commonly supposed that 'touching' must be reciprocal.
The reason of this belief is that 'movers' which belong to the same
kind as the 'moved' impart motion by being moved. Hence if anything
imparts motion without itself being moved, it may touch the 'moved'
and yet itself be touched by nothing-for we say sometimes that the
man who grieves us 'touches' us, but not that we 'touch' him.

The account just given may serve to distinguish and define the 'contact'
which occurs in the things of Nature. 

Part 7

Next in order we must discuss 'action' and 'passion'. The traditional
theories on the subject are conflicting. For (i) most thinkers are
unanimous in maintaining (a) that 'like' is always unaffected by 'like',
because (as they argue) neither of two 'likes' is more apt than the
other either to act or to suffer action, since all the properties
which belong to the one belong identically and in the same degree
to the other; and (b) that 'unlikes', i.e. 'differents', are by nature
such as to act and suffer action reciprocally. For even when the smaller
fire is destroyed by the greater, it suffers this effect (they say)
owing to its 'contrariety' since the great is contrary to the small.
But (ii) Democritus dissented from all the other thinkers and maintained
a theory peculiar to himself. He asserts that agent and patient are
identical, i.e. 'like'. It is not possible (he says) that 'others',
i.e. 'differents', should suffer action from one another: on the contrary,
even if two things, being 'others', do act in some way on one another,
this happens to them not qua 'others' but qua possessing an identical
property. 

Such, then, are the traditional theories, and it looks as if the statements
of their advocates were in manifest conflict. But the reason of this
conflict is that each group is in fact stating a part, whereas they
ought to have taken a comprehensive view of the subject as a whole.
For (i) if A and B are 'like'-absolutely and in all respects without
difference from one another -it is reasonable to infer that neither
is in any way affected by the other. Why, indeed, should either of
them tend to act any more than the other? Moreover, if 'like' can
be affected by 'like', a thing can also be affected by itself: and
yet if that were so-if 'like' tended in fact to act qua 'like'-there
would be nothing indestructible or immovable, for everything would
move itself. And (ii) the same consequence follows if A and B are
absolutely 'other', i.e. in no respect identical. Whiteness could
not be affected in any way by line nor line by whiseness-except perhaps
'coincidentally', viz. if the line happened to be white or black:
for unless two things either are, or are composed of, 'contraries',
neither drives the other out of its natural condition. But (iii) since
only those things which either involve a 'contrariety' or are 'contraries'-and
not any things selected at random-are such as to suffer action and
to act, agent and patient must be 'like' (i.e. identical) in kind
and yet 'unlike' (i.e. contrary) in species. (For it is a law of nature
that body is affected by body, flavour by flavour, colour by colour,
and so in general what belongs to any kind by a member of the same
kind-the reason being that 'contraries' are in every case within a
single identical kind, and it is 'contraries' which reciprocally act
and suffer action.) Hence agent and patient must be in one sense identical,
but in another sense other than (i.e. 'unlike') one another. And since
(a) patient and agent are generically identical (i.e. 'like') but
specifically 'unlike', while (b) it is 'contraries' that exhibit this
character: it is clear that 'contraries' and their 'intermediates'
are such as to suffer action and to act reciprocally-for indeed it
is these that constitute the entire sphere of passing-away and coming-to-be.

We can now understand why fire heats and the cold thing cools, and
in general why the active thing assimilates to itself the patient.
For agent and patient are contrary to one another, and coming-to-be
is a process into the contrary: hence the patient must change into
the agent, since it is only thus that coming-to be will be a process
into the contrary. And, again, it is intelligible that the advocates
of both views, although their theories are not the same, are yet in
contact with the nature of the facts. For sometimes we speak of the
substratum as suffering action (e.g. of 'the man' as being healed,
being warmed and chilled, and similarly in all the other cases), but
at other times we say 'what is cold is 'being warmed', 'what is sick
is being healed': and in both these ways of speaking we express the
truth, since in one sense it is the 'matter', while in another sense
it is the 'contrary', which suffers action. (We make the same distinction
in speaking of the agent: for sometimes we say that 'the man', but
at other times that 'what is hot', produces heat.) Now the one group
of thinkers supposed that agent and patient must possess something
identical, because they fastened their attention on the substratum:
while the other group maintained the opposite because their attention
was concentrated on the 'contraries'. We must conceive the same account
to hold of action and passion as that which is true of 'being moved'
and 'imparting motion'. For the 'mover', like the 'agent', has two
meanings. Both (a) that which contains the originative source of the
motion is thought to 'impart motion' (for the originative source is
first amongst the causes), and also (b) that which is last, i.e. immediately
next to the moved thing and to the coming-to-be. A similar distinction
holds also of the agent: for we speak not only (a) of the doctor,
but also (b) of the wine, as healing. Now, in motion, there is nothing
to prevent the firs; mover being unmoved (indeed, as regards some
'first' movers' this is actually necessary) although the last mover
always imparts motion by being itself moved: and, in action, there
is nothing to prevent the first agent being unaffected, while the
last agent only acts by suffering action itself. For agent and patient
have not the same matter, agent acts without being affected: thus
the art of healing produces health without itself being acted upon
in any way by that which is being healed. But (b) the food, in acting,
is itself in some way acted upon: for, in acting, it is simultaneously
heated or cooled or otherwise affected. Now the art of healing corresponds
to an 'originative source', while the food corresponds to 'the last'
(i.e. 'continuous') mover. 

Those active powers, then, whose forms are not embodied in matter,
are unaffected: but those whose forms are in matter are such as to
be affected in acting. For we maintain that one and the same 'matter'
is equally, so to say, the basis of either of the two opposed things-being
as it were a 'kind'; and that that which can he hot must be made hot,
provided the heating agent is there, i.e. comes near. Hence (as we
have said) some of the active powers are unaffected while others are
such as to be affected; and what holds of motion is true also of the
active powers. For as in motion 'the first mover' is unmoved, so among
the active powers 'the first agent' is unaffected. 

The active power is a 'cause' in the sense of that from which the
process originates: but the end, for the sake of which it takes place,
is not 'active'. (That is why health is not 'active', except metaphorically.)
For when the agent is there, the patient he-comes something: but when
'states' are there, the patient no longer becomes but already is-and
'forms' (i.e. lends') are a kind of 'state'. As to the 'matter', it
(qua matter) is passive. Now fire contains 'the hot' embodied in matter:
but a 'hot' separate from matter (if such a thing existed) could not
suffer any action. Perhaps, indeed, it is impossible that 'the hot'
should exist in separation from matter: but if there are any entities
thus separable, what we are saying would be true of them.

We have thus explained what action and passion are, what things exhibit
them, why they do so, and in what manner. We must go on to discuss
how it is possible for action and passion to take place.

Part 8

Some philosophers think that the 'last' agent-the 'agent' in the strictest
sense-enters in through certain pores, and so the patient suffers
action. It is in this way, they assert, that we see and hear and exercise
all our other senses. Moreover, according to them, things are seen
through air and water and other transparent bodies, because such bodies
possess pores, invisible indeed owing to their minuteness, but close-set
and arranged in rows: and the more transparent the body, the more
frequent and serial they suppose its pores to be. Such was the theory
which some philosophers (induding Empedocles) advanced in regard to
the structure of certain bodies. They do not restrict it to the bodies
which act and suffer action: but 'combination' too, they say, takes
place 'only between bodies whose pores are in reciprocal symmetry'.
The most systematic and consistent theory, however, and one that applied
to all bodies, was advanced by Leucippus and Democritus: and, in maintaining
it, they took as their starting-point what naturally comes first.

For some of the older philosophers thought that 'what is' must of
necessity be 'one' and immovable. The void, they argue, 'is not':
but unless there is a void with a separate being of its own, 'what
is' cannot be moved-nor again can it be 'many', since there is nothing
to keep things apart. And in this respect, they insist, the view that
the universe is not 'continuous' but 'discretes-in-contact' is no
better than the view that there are 'many' (and not 'one') and a void.
For (suppose that the universe is discretes-in-contact. Then), if
it is divisible through and through, there is no 'one', and therefore
no 'many' either, but the Whole is void; while to maintain that it
is divisible at some points, but not at others, looks like an arbitrary
fiction. For up to what limit is it divisible? And for what reason
is part of the Whole indivisible, i.e. a plenum, and part divided?
Further, they maintain, it is equally necessary to deny the existence
of motion. 

Reasoning in this way, therefore, they were led to transcend sense-perception,
and to disregard it on the ground that 'one ought to follow the argument':
and so they assert that the universe is 'one' and immovable. Some
of them add that it is 'infinite', since the limit (if it had one)
would be a limit against the void. 

There were, then, certain thinkers who, for the reasons we have stated,
enunciated views of this kind as their theory of 'The Truth'.... Moreover,
although these opinions appear to follow logically in a dialectical
discussion, yet to believe them seems next door to madness when one
considers the facts. For indeed no lunatic seems to be so far out
of his senses as to suppose that fire and ice are 'one': it is only
between what is right and what seems right from habit, that some people
are mad enough to see no difference. 

Leucippus, however, thought he had a theory which harmonized with
sense-perception and would not abolish either coming-to-be and passing-away
or motion and the multiplicity of things. He made these concessions
to the facts of perception: on the other hand, he conceded to the
Monists that there could be no motion without a void. The result is
a theory which he states as follows: 'The void is a "not being", and
no part of "what is" is a "not-being"; for what "is" in the strict
sense of the term is an absolute plenum. This plenum, however, is
not "one": on the contrary, it is a many" infinite in number and invisible
owing to the minuteness of their bulk. The "many" move in the void
(for there is a void): and by coming together they produce "coming
to-be", while by separating they produce "passing-away". Moreover,
they act and suffer action wherever they chance to be in contact (for
there they are not "one"), and they generate by being put together
and becoming intertwined. From the genuinely-one, on the other hand,
there never could have come-to-be a multiplicity, nor from the genuinely-many
a "one": that is impossible. But' (just as Empedocles and some of
the other philosophers say that things suffer action through their
pores, so) 'all "alteration" and all "passion" take place in the way
that has been explained: breaking-up (i.e. passing-away) is effected
by means of the void, and so too is growth-solids creeping in to fill
the void places.' Empedocles too is practically bound to adopt the
same theory as Leucippus. For he must say that there are certain solids
which, however, are indivisible-unless there are continuous pores
all through the body. But this last alternative is impossible: for
then there will be nothing solid in the body (nothing beside the pores)
but all of it will be void. It is necessary, therefore, for his 'contiguous
discretes' to be indivisible, while the intervals between them-which
he calls 'pores'-must be void. But this is precisely Leucippus' theory
of action and passion. 

Such, approximately, are the current explanations of the manner in
which some things 'act' while others 'suffer action'. And as regards
the Atomists, it is not only clear what their explanation is: it is
also obvious that it follows with tolerable consistency from the assumptions
they employ. But there is less obvious consistency in the explanation
offered by the other thinkers. It is not clear, for instance, how,
on the theory of Empedocles, there is to be 'passing-away' as well
as 'alteration'. For the primary bodies of the Atomists-the primary
constituents of which bodies are composed, and the ultimate elements
into which they are dissolved-are indivisible, differing from one
another only in figure. In the philosophy of Empedocles, on the other
hand, it is evident that all the other bodies down to the 'elements'
have their coming-to-be and their passingaway: but it is not clear
how the 'elements' themselves, severally in their aggregated masses,
come-to-be and pass-away. Nor is it possible for Empedocles to explain
how they do so, since he does not assert that Fire too (and similarly
every one of his other 'elements') possesses 'elementary constituents'
of itself. 

Such an assertion would commit him to doctrines like those which Plato
has set forth in the Timaeus. For although both Plato and Leucippus
postulate elementary constituents that are indivisible and distinctively
characterized by figures, there is this great difference between the
two theories: the 'indivisibles' of Leucippus (i) are solids, while
those of Plato are planes, and (ii) are characterized by an infinite
variety of figures, while the characterizing figures employed by Plato
are limited in number. Thus the 'comings-to-be' and the 'dissociations'
result from the 'indivisibles' (a) according to Leucippus through
the void and through contact (for it is at the point of contact that
each of the composite bodies is divisible), but (b) according to Plato
in virtue of contact alone, since he denies there is a void.

Now we have discussed 'indivisible planes' in the preceding treatise.'
But with regard to the assumption of 'indivisible solids', although
we must not now enter upon a detailed study of its consequences, the
following criticisms fall within the compass of a short digression:
i. The Atomists are committed to the view that every 'indivisible'
is incapable alike of receiving a sensible property (for nothing can
'suffer action' except through the void) and of producing one-no 'indivisible'
can be, e.g. either hard or cold. Yet it is surely a paradox that
an exception is made of 'the hot'-'the hot' being assigned as peculiar
to the spherical figure: for, that being so, its 'contrary' also ('the
cold') is bound to belong to another of the figures. If, however,
these properties (heat and cold) do belong to the 'indivisibles',
it is a further paradox that they should not possess heaviness and
lightness, and hardness and softness. And yet Democritus says 'the
more any indivisible exceeds, the heavier it is'-to which we must
clearly add 'and the hotter it is'. But if that is their character,
it is impossible they should not be affected by one another: the 'slightly-hot
indivisible', e.g. will inevitably suffer action from one which far
exceeds it in heat. Again, if any 'indivisible' is 'hard', there must
also be one which is 'soft': but 'the soft' derives its very name
from the fact that it suffers a certain action-for 'soft' is that
which yields to pressure. 

Ii. But further, not only is it paradoxical (i) that no property except
figure should belong to the 'indivisibles': it is also paradoxical
(ii) that, if other properties do belong to them, one only of these
additional properties should attach to each-e.g. that this 'indivisible'
should be cold and that 'indivisible' hot. For, on that supposition,
their substance would not even be uniform. And it is equally impossible
(iii) that more than one of these additional properties should belong
to the single 'indivisible'. For, being indivisible, it will possess
these properties in the same point-so that, if it 'suffers action'
by being chilled, it will also, qua chilled, 'act' or 'suffer action'
in some other way. And the same line of argument applies to all the
other properties too: for the difficulty we have just raised confronts,
as a necessary consequence, all who advocate 'indivisibles' (whether
solids or planes), since their 'indivisibles' cannot become either
'rarer' or 'derser' inasmuch as there is no void in them.

Iii. It is a further paradox that there should be small 'indivisibles',
but not large ones. For it is natural enough, from the ordinary point
of view, that the larger bodies should be more liable to fracture
than the small ones, since they (viz. the large bodies) are easily
broken up because they collide with many other bodies. But why should
indivisibility as such be the property of small, rather than of large,
bodies? 

Iv. Again, is the substance of all those solids uniform, or do they
fall into sets which differ from one another-as if, e.g. some of them,
in their aggregated bulk, were 'fiery', others earthy'? For (i) if
all of them are uniform in substance, what is it that separated one
from another? Or why, when they come into contact, do they not coalesce
into one, as drops of water run together when drop touches drop (for
the two cases are precisely parallel)? On the other hand (ii) if they
fall into differing sets, how are these characterized? It is clear,
too, that these, rather than the 'figures', ought to be postulated
as 'original reals', i.e. causes from which the phenomena result.
Moreover, if they differed in substance, they would both act and suffer
action on coming into reciprocal contact. 

V. Again, what is it which sets them moving? For if their 'mover'
is other than themselves, they are such as to 'suffer action'. If,
on the other hand, each of them sets itself in motion, either (a)
it will be divisible ('imparting motion' qua this, 'being moved' qua
that), or (b) contrary properties will attach to it in the same respect-i.e.
'matter' will be identical in-potentiality as well as numerically-identical.

As to the thinkers who explain modification of property through the
movement facilitated by the pores, if this is supposed to occur notwithstanding
the fact that the pores are filled, their postulate of pores is superfluous.
For if the whole body suffers action under these conditions, it would
suffer action in the same way even if it had no pores but were just
its own continuous self. Moreover, how can their account of 'vision
through a medium' be correct? It is impossible for (the visual ray)
to penetrate the transparent bodies at their 'contacts'; and impossible
for it to pass through their pores if every pore be full. For how
will that differ from having no pores at all? The body will be uniformly
'full' throughout. But, further, even if these passages, though they
must contain bodies, are 'void', the same consequence will follow
once more. And if they are 'too minute to admit any body', it is absurd
to suppose there is a 'minute' void and yet to deny the existence
of a 'big' one (no matter how small the 'big' may be), or to imagine
'the void' means anything else than a body's place-whence it clearly
follows that to every body there will correspond a void of equal cubic
capacity. 

As a general criticism we must urge that to postulate pores is superfluous.
For if the agent produces no effect by touching the patient, neither
will it produce any by passing through its pores. On the other hand,
if it acts by contact, then-even without pores-some things will 'suffer
action' and others will 'act', provided they are by nature adapted
for reciprocal action and passion. Our arguments have shown that it
is either false or futile to advocate pores in the sense in which
some thinkers conceive them. But since bodies are divisible through
and through, the postulate of pores is ridiculous: for, qua divisible,
a body can fall into separate parts. 

Part 9

Let explain the way in which things in fact possess the power of generating,
and of acting and suffering action: and let us start from the principle
we have often enunciated. For, assuming the distinction between (a)
that which is potentially and (b) that which is actually such-and-such,
it is the nature of the first, precisely in so far as it is what it
is, to suffer action through and through, not merely to be susceptible
in some parts while insusceptible in others. But its susceptibility
varies in degree, according as it is more or less; such-and such,
and one would be more justified in speaking of 'pores' in this connexion:
for instance, in the metals there are veins of 'the susceptible' stretching
continuously through the substance. 

So long, indeed, as any body is naturally coherent and one, it is
insusceptible. So, too, bodies are insusceptible so long as they are
not in contact either with one another or with other bodies which
are by nature such as to act and suffer action. (To illustrate my
meaning: Fire heats not only when in contact, but also from a distance.
For the fire heats the air, and the air-being by nature such as both
to act and suffer action-heats the body.) But the supposition that
a body is 'susceptible in some parts, but insusceptible in others'
(is only possible for those who hold an erroneous view concerning
the divisibility of magnitudes. For us) the following account results
from the distinctions we established at the beginning. For (i) if
magnitudes are not divisible through and through-if, on the contrary,
there are indivisible solids or planes-then indeed no body would be
susceptible through and through :but neither would any be continuous.
Since, however, (ii) this is false, i.e. since every body is divisible,
there is no difference between 'having been divided into parts which
remain in contact' and 'being divisible'. For if a body 'can be separated
at the contacts' (as some thinkers express it), then, even though
it has not yet been divided, it will be in a state of dividedness-since,
as it can be divided, nothing inconceivable results. And (iii) the
suposition is open to this general objection-it is a paradox that
'passion' should occur in this manner only, viz. by the bodies being
split. For this theory abolishes 'alteration': but we see the same
body liquid at one time and solid at another, without losing its continuity.
It has suffered this change not by 'division' and composition', nor
yet by 'turning' and 'intercontact' as Democritus asserts; for it
has passed from the liquid to the solid state without any change of
'grouping' or 'position' in the constituents of its substance. Nor
are there contained within it those 'hard' (i.e. congealed) particles
'indivisible in their bulk': on the contrary, it is liquid-and again,
solid and congealed-uniformly all through. This theory, it must be
added, makes growth and diminution impossible also. For if there is
to be opposition (instead of the growing thing having changed as a
whole, either by the admixture of something or by its own transformation),
increase of size will not have resulted in any and every part.

So much, then, to establish that things generate and are generated,
act and suffer action, reciprocally; and to distinguish the way in
which these processes can occur from the (impossible) way in which
some thinkers say they occur. 

Part 10

But we have still to explain 'combination', for that was the third
of the subjects we originally proposed to discuss. Our explanation
will proceed on the same method as before. We must inquire: What is
'combination', and what is that which can 'combine'? Of what things,
and under what conditions, is 'combination' a property? And, further,
does 'combination' exist in fact, or is it false to assert its existence?

For, according to some thinkers, it is impossible for one thing to
be combined with another. They argue that (i) if both the 'combined'
constituents persist unaltered, they are no more 'combined' now than
they were before, but are in the same condition: while (ii) if one
has been destroyed, the constituents have not been 'combined'-on the
contrary, one constituent is and the other is not, whereas 'combination'
demands uniformity of condition in them both: and on the same principle
(iii) even if both the combining constituents have been destroyed
as the result of their coalescence, they cannot 'have been combined'
since they have no being at all. 

What we have in this argument is, it would seem, a demand for the
precise distinction of 'combination' from coming-to-be and passingaway
(for it is obvious that 'combination', if it exists, must differ from
these processes) and for the precise distinction of the 'combinable'
from that which is such as to come-to-be and pass-away. As soon, therefore,
as these distinctions are clear, the difficulties raised by the argument
would be solved. 

Now (i) we do not speak of the wood as 'combined' with the fire, nor
of its burning as a 'combining' either of its particles with one another
or of itself with the fire: what we say is that 'the fire is coming-to-be,
but the wood is 'passing-away'. Similarly, we speak neither (ii) of
the food as 'combining' with the body, nor (iii) of the shape as 'combining'
with the wax and thus fashioning the lump. Nor can body 'combine'
with white, nor (to generalize) 'properties' and 'states' with 'things':
for we see them persisting unaltered. But again (iv) white and knowledge
cannot be 'combined' either, nor any other of the 'adjectivals'. (Indeed,
this is a blemish in the theory of those who assert that 'once upon
a time all things were together and combined'. For not everything
can 'combine' with everything. On the contrary, both of the constituents
that are combined in the compound must originally have existed in
separation: but no property can have separate existence.)

Since, however, some things are-potentially while others are-actually,
the constituents combined in a compound can 'be' in a sense and yet
'not-be'. The compound may he-actually other than the constituents
from which it has resulted; nevertheless each of them may still he-potentially
what it was before they were combined, and both of them may survive
undestroyed. (For this was the difficulty that emerged in the previous
argument: and it is evident that the combining constituents not only
coalesce, having formerly existed in separation, but also can again
be separated out from the compound.) The constituents, therefore,
neither (a) persist actually, as 'body' and 'white' persist: nor (b)
are they destroyed (either one of them or both), for their 'power
of action' is preserved. Hence these difficulties may be dismissed:
but the problem immediately connected with them-whether combination
is something relative to perception' must be set out and discussed.

When the combining constituents have been divided into parts so small,
and have been juxtaposed in such a manner, that perception fails to
discriminate them one from another, have they then 'been combined
Or ought we to say 'No, not until any and every part of one constituent
is juxtaposed to a part of the other'? The term, no doubt, is applied
in the former sense: we speak, e.g. of wheat having been 'combined'
with barley when each grain of the one is juxtaposed to a grain of
the other. But every body is divisible and therefore, since body 'combined'
with body is uniform in texture throughout, any and every part of
each constituent ought to be juxtaposed to a part of the other.

No body, however, can be divided into its 'least' parts: and 'composition'
is not identical with 'combination', but other than it. From these
premises it clearly follows (i) that so long as the constituents are
preserved in small particles, we must not speak of them as 'combined'.
(For this will be a 'composition' instead of a 'blending' or 'combination':
nor will every portion of the resultant exhibit the same ratio between
its constituents as the whole. But we maintain that, if 'combination'
has taken place, the compound must be uniform in texture throughout-any
part of such a compound being the same as the whole, just as any part
of water is water: whereas, if 'combination' is 'composition of the
small particles', nothing of the kind will happen. On the contrary,
the constituents will only be 'combined' relatively to perception:
and the same thing will be 'combined' to one percipient, if his sight
is not sharp, (but not to another,) while to the eye of Lynceus nothing
will be 'combined'.) It clearly follows (ii) that we must not speak
of the constituents as 'combined in virtue of a division such that
any and every part of each is juxtaposed to a part of the other: for
it is impossible for them to be thus divided. Either, then, there
is no 'combination', or we have still to explain the manner in which
it can take place. 

Now, as we maintain, some things are such as to act and others such
as to suffer action from them. Moreover, some things-viz. those Which
have the same matter-'reciprocate', i.e. are such as to act upon one
another and to suffer action from one another; while other things,
viz. agents which have not the same matter as their patients, act
without themselves suffering action. Such agents cannot 'combine'-that
is why neither the art of healing nor health produces health by 'combining'
with the bodies of the patients. Amongst those things, however, which
are reciprocally active and passive, some are easily-divisible. Now
(i) if a great quantity (or a large bulk) of one of these easily-divisible
'reciprocating' materials be brought together with a little (or with
a small piece) of another, the effect produced is not 'combination',
but increase of the dominant: for the other material is transformed
into the dominant. (That is why a drop of wine does not 'combine'
with ten thousand gallons of water: for its form is dissolved, and
it is changed so as to merge in the total volume of water.) On the
other hand (ii) when there is a certain equilibrium between their
'powers of action', then each of them changes out of its own nature
towards the dominant: yet neither becomes the other, but both become
an intermediate with properties common to both. 

Thus it is clear that only those agents are 'combinable' which involve
a contrariety-for these are such as to suffer action reciprocally.
And, further, they combine more freely if small pieces of each of
them are juxtaposed. For in that condition they change one another
more easily and more quickly; whereas this effect takes a long time
when agent and patient are present in bulk. 

Hence, amongst the divisible susceptible materials, those whose shape
is readily adaptable have a tendency to combine: for they are easily
divided into small particles, since that is precisely what 'being
readily adaptable in shape' implies. For instance, liquids are the
most 'combinable' of all bodies-because, of all divisible materials,
the liquid is most readily adaptable in shape, unless it be viscous.
Viscous liquids, it is true, produce no effect except to increase
the volume and bulk. But when one of the constituents is alone susceptible-or
superlatively susceptible, the other being susceptible in a very slight
degree-the compound resulting from their combination is either no
greater in volume or only a little greater. This is what happens when
tin is combined with bronze. For some things display a hesitating
and ambiguous attitude towards one another-showing a slight tendency
to combine and also an inclination to behave as 'receptive matter'
and 'form' respectively. The behaviour of these metals is a case in
point. For the tin almost vanishes, behaving as if it were an immaterial
property of the bronze: having been combined, it disappears, leaving
no trace except the colour it has imparted to the bronze. The same
phenomenon occurs in other instances too. 

It is clear, then, from the foregoing account, that 'combination'
occurs, what it is, to what it is due, and what kind of thing is 'combinable'.
The phenomenon depends upon the fact that some things are such as
to be (a) reciprocally susceptible and (b) readily adaptable in shape,
i.e. easily divisible. For such things can be 'combined' without its
being necessary either that they should have been destroyed or that
they should survive absolutely unaltered: and their 'combination'
need not be a 'composition', nor merely 'relative to perception'.
On the contrary: anything is 'combinable' which, being readily adaptable
in shape, is such as to suffer action and to act; and it is 'combinable
with' another thing similarly characterized (for the 'combinable'
is relative to the 'combinable'); and 'combination' is unification
of the 'combinables', resulting from their 'alteration'.



BOOK II

Part 1 

We have explained under what conditions 'combination', 'contact',
and 'action-passion' are attributable to the things which undergo
natural change. Further, we have discussed 'unqualified' coming-to-be
and passing-away, and explained under what conditions they are predicable,
of what subject, and owing to what cause. Similarly, we have also
discussed 'alteration', and explained what 'altering' is and how it
differs from coming-to-be and passing-away. But we have still to investigate
the so-called 'elements' of bodies. 

For the complex substances whose formation and maintenance are due
to natural processes all presuppose the perceptible bodies as the
condition of their coming-to-be and passing-away: but philosophers
disagree in regard to the matter which underlies these perceptible
bodies. Some maintain it is single, supposing it to be, e.g. Air or
Fire, or an 'intermediate' between these two (but still a body with
a separate existence). Others, on the contrary, postulate two or more
materials-ascribing to their 'association' and 'dissociation', or
to their 'alteration', the coming-to-be and passing-away of things.
(Some, for instance, postulate Fire and Earth: some add Air, making
three: and some, like Empedocles, reckon Water as well, thus postulating
four.) 

Now we may agree that the primary materials, whose change (whether
it be 'association and dissociation' or a process of another kind)
results in coming-to-be and passingaway, are rightly described as
'originative sources, i.e. elements'. But (i) those thinkers are in
error who postulate, beside the bodies we have mentioned, a single
matter-and that corporeal and separable matter. For this 'body' of
theirs cannot possibly exist without a 'perceptible contrariety':
this 'Boundless', which some thinkers identify with the 'original
real', must be either light or heavy, either cold or hot. And (ii)
what Plato has written in the Timaeus is not based on any precisely-articulated
conception. For he has not stated clearly whether his 'Omnirecipient"
exists in separation from the 'elements'; nor does he make any use
of it. He says, indeed, that it is a substratum prior to the so-called
'elements'-underlying them, as gold underlies the things that are
fashioned of gold. (And yet this comparison, if thus expressed, is
itself open to criticism. Things which come-to-be and pass-away cannot
be called by the name of the material out of which they have come-tobe:
it is only the results of 'alteration' which retain the name of the
substratum whose 'alterations' they are. However, he actually says'
that the truest account is to affirm that each of them is "gold"'.)
Nevertheless he carries his analysis of the 'elements'-solids though
they are-back to 'planes', and it is impossible for 'the Nurse' (i.e.
the primary matter) to be identical with 'the planes'. 

Our own doctrine is that although there is a matter of the perceptible
bodies (a matter out of which the so-called 'clements' come-to-be),
it has no separate existence, but is always bound up with a contrariety.
A more precise account of these presuppositions has been given in
another work': we must, however, give a detailed explanation of the
primary bodies as well, since they too are similarly derived from
the matter. We must reckon as an 'originative source' and as 'primary'
the matter which underlies, though it is inseparable from, the contrary
qualities: for the hot' is not matter for 'the cold' nor 'the cold'
for 'the hot', but the substratum is matter for them both. We therefore
have to recognize three 'originative sources': firstly that which
potentially perceptible body, secondly the contrarieties (I mean,
e.g. heat and cold), and thirdly Fire, Water, and the like. Only 'thirdly',
however: for these bodies change into one another (they are not immutable
as Empedocles and other thinkers assert, since 'alteration' would
then have been impossible), whereas the contrarieties do not change.

Nevertheless, even so the question remains: What sorts of contrarieties,
and how many of them, are to be accounted 'originative sources' of
body? For all the other thinkers assume and use them without explaining
why they are these or why they are just so many. 

Part 2

Since, then, we are looking for 'originative sources' of perceptible
body; and since 'perceptible' is equivalent to 'tangible', and 'tangible'
is that of which the perception is touch; it is clear that not all
the contrarieties constitute 'forms' and 'originative sources' of
body, but only those which correspond to touch. For it is in accordance
with a contrariety-a contrariety, moreover, of tangible qualities-that
the primary bodies are differentiated. That is why neither whiteness
(and blackness), nor sweetness (and bitterness), nor (similarly) any
quality belonging to the other perceptible contrarieties either, constitutes
an 'element'. And yet vision is prior to touch, so that its object
also is prior to the object of touch. The object of vision, however,
is a quality of tangible body not qua tangible, but qua something
else-qua something which may well be naturally prior to the object
of touch. 

Accordingly, we must segregate the tangible differences and contrarieties,
and distinguish which amongst them are primary. Contrarieties correlative
to touch are the following: hot-cold, dry-moist, heavy-light, hard-soft,
viscous-brittle, rough-smooth, coarse-fine. Of these (i) heavy and
light are neither active nor susceptible. Things are not called 'heavy'
and 'light' because they act upon, or suffer action from, other things.
But the 'elements' must be reciprocally active and susceptible, since
they 'combine' and are transformed into one another. On the other
hand (ii) hot and cold, and dry and moist, are terms, of which the
first pair implies power to act and the second pair susceptibility.
'Hot' is that which 'associates' things of the same kind (for 'dissociating',
which people attribute to Fire as its function, is 'associating' things
of the same class, since its effect is to eliminate what is foreign),
while 'cold' is that which brings together, i.e. 'associates', homogeneous
and heterogeneous things alike. And moise is that which, being readily
adaptable in shape, is not determinable by any limit of its own: while
'dry' is that which is readily determinable by its own limit, but
not readily adaptable in shape. 

From moist and dry are derived (iii) the fine and coarse, viscous
and brittle, hard and soft, and the remaining tangible differences.
For (a) since the moist has no determinate shape, but is readily adaptable
and follows the outline of that which is in contact with it, it is
characteristic of it to be 'such as to fill up'. Now 'the fine' is
'such as to fill up'. For the fine' consists of subtle particles;
but that which consists of small particles is 'such as to fill up',
inasmuch as it is in contact whole with whole-and 'the fine' exhibits
this character in a superlative degree. Hence it is evident that the
fine derives from the moist, while the coarse derives from the dry.
Again (b) the viscous' derives from the moist: for 'the viscous' (e.g.
oil) is a 'moist' modified in a certain way. 'The brittle', on the
other hand, derives from the dry: for 'brittle' is that which is completely
dry-so completely, that its solidification has actually been due to
failure of moisture. Further (c) 'the soft' derives from the moist.
For 'soft' is that which yields to pressure by retiring into itself,
though it does not yield by total displacement as the moist does-which
explains why the moist is not 'soft', although 'the soft' derives
from the moist. 'The hard', on the other hand, derives from the dry:
for 'hard' is that which is solidified, and the solidified is dry.

The terms 'dry' and 'moist' have more senses than one. For 'the damp',
as well as the moist, is opposed to the dry: and again 'the solidified',
as well as the dry, is opposed to the moist. But all these qualities
derive from the dry and moist we mentioned first.' For (i) the dry
is opposed to the damp: i.e. 'damp' is that which has foreign moisture
on its surface ('sodden' being that which is penetrated to its core),
while 'dry' is that which has lost foreign moisture. Hence it is evident
that the damp will derive from the moist, and 'the dry' which is opposed
to it will derive from the primary dry. Again (ii) the 'moist' and
the solidified derive in the same way from the primary pair. For 'moist'
is that which contains moisture of its-own deep within it ('sodden'
being that which is deeply penetrated by foreign mosture), whereas
'solidigied' is that which has lost this inner moisture. Hence these
too derive from the primary pair, the 'solidified' from the dry and
the 'solidified' from the dry the 'liquefiable' from the moist.

It is clear, then, that all the other differences reduce to the first
four, but that these admit of no further reduction. For the hot is
not essentially moist or dry, nor the moist essentially hot or cold:
nor are the cold and the dry derivative forms, either of one another
or of the hot and the moist. Hence these must be four. 

Part 3

The elementary qualities are four, and any four terms can be combined
in six couples. Contraries, however, refuse to be coupled: for it
is impossible for the same thing to be hot and cold, or moist and
dry. Hence it is evident that the 'couplings' of the elementary qualities
will be four: hot with dry and moist with hot, and again cold with
dry and cold with moist. And these four couples have attached themselves
to the apparently 'simple' bodies (Fire, Air, Water, and Earth) in
a manner consonant with theory. For Fire is hot and dry, whereas Air
is hot and moist (Air being a sort of aqueous vapour); and Water is
cold and moist, while Earth is cold and dry. Thus the differences
are reasonably distributed among the primary bodies, and the number
of the latter is consonant with theory. For all who make the simple
bodies 'elements' postulate either one, or two, or three, or four.
Now (i) those who assert there is one only, and then generate everything
else by condensation and rarefaction, are in effect making their 'originative
sources' two, viz. the rare and the dense, or rather the hot and the
cold: for it is these which are the moulding forces, while the 'one'
underlies them as a 'matter'. But (ii) those who postulate two from
the start-as Parmenides postulated Fire and Earth-make the intermediates
(e.g. Air and Water) blends of these. The same course is followed
(iii) by those who advocate three. (We may compare what Plato does
in Me Divisions': for he makes 'the middle' a blend.) Indeed, there
is practically no difference between those who postulate two and those
who postulate three, except that the former split the middle 'element'
into two, while the latter treat it as only one. But (iv) some advocate
four from the start, e.g. Empedocles: yet he too draws them together
so as to reduce them to the two, for he opposes all the others to
Fire. 

In fact, however, fire and air, and each of the bodies we have mentioned,
are not simple, but blended. The 'simple' bodies are indeed similar
in nature to them, but not identical with them. Thus the 'simple'
body corresponding to fire is 'such-as-fire, not fire: that which
corresponds to air is 'such-as-air': and so on with the rest of them.
But fire is an excess of heat, just as ice is an excess of cold. For
freezing and boiling are excesses of heat and cold respectively. Assuming,
therefore, that ice is a freezing of moist and cold, fire analogously
will be a boiling of dry and hot: a fact, by the way, which explains
why nothing comes-to-be either out of ice or out of fire.

The 'simple' bodies, since they are four, fall into two pairs which
belong to the two regions, each to each: for Fire and Air are forms
of the body moving towards the 'limit', while Earth and Water are
forms of the body which moves towards the 'centre'. Fire and Earth,
moreover, are extremes and purest: Water and Air, on the contrary
are intermediates and more like blends. And, further, the members
of either pair are contrary to those of the other, Water being contrary
to Fire and Earth to Air; for the qualities constituting Water and
Earth are contrary to those that constitute Fire and Air. Nevertheless,
since they are four, each of them is characterized par excellence
a single quality: Earth by dry rather than by cold, Water by cold
rather than by moist, Air by moist rather than by hot, and Fire by
hot rather than by dry. 

Part 4

It has been established before' that the coming-to-be of the 'simple'
bodies is reciprocal. At the same time, it is manifest, even on the
evidence of perception, that they do come-to-be: for otherwise there
would not have been 'alteration, since 'alteration' is change in respect
to the qualities of the objects of touch. Consequently, we must explain
(i) what is the manner of their reciprocal transformation, and (ii)
whether every one of them can come to-be out of every one-or whether
some can do so, but not others. 

Now it is evident that all of them are by nature such as to change
into one another: for coming-to-be is a change into contraries and
out of contraries, and the 'elements' all involve a contrariety in
their mutual relations because their distinctive qualities are contrary.
For in some of them both qualities are contrary-e.g. in Fire and Water,
the first of these being dry and hot, and the second moist and cold:
while in others one of the qualities (though only one) is contrary-e.g.
in Air and Water, the first being moist and hot, and the second moist
and cold. It is evident, therefore, if we consider them in general,
that every one is by nature such as to come-to-be out of every one:
and when we come to consider them severally, it is not difficult to
see the manner in which their transformation is effected. For, though
all will result from all, both the speed and the facility of their
conversion will differ in degree. 

Thus (i) the process of conversion will be quick between those which
have interchangeable 'complementary factors', but slow between those
which have none. The reason is that it is easier for a single thing
to change than for many. Air, e.g. will result from Fire if a single
quality changes: for Fire, as we saw, is hot and dry while Air is
hot and moist, so that there will be Air if the dry be overcome by
the moist. Again, Water will result from Air if the hot be overcome
by the cold: for Air, as we saw, is hot and moist while Water is cold
and moist, so that, if the hot changes, there will be Water. So too,
in the same manner, Earth will result from Water and Fire from Earth,
since the two 'elements' in both these couples have interchangeable
'complementary factors'. For Water is moist and cold while Earth is
cold and dry-so that, if the moist be overcome, there will be Earth:
and again, since Fire is dry and hot while Earth is cold and dry,
Fire will result from Earth if the cold pass-away. 

It is evident, therefore, that the coming-to-be of the 'simple' bodies
will be cyclical; and that this cyclical method of transformation
is the easiest, because the consecutive 'clements' contain interchangeable
'complementary factors'. On the other hand (ii) the transformation
of Fire into Water and of Air into Earth, and again of Water and Earth
into Fire and Air respectively, though possible, is more difficult
because it involves the change of more qualities. For if Fire is to
result from Water, both the cold and the moist must pass-away: and
again, both the cold and the dry must pass-away if Air is to result
from Earth. So' too, if Water and Earth are to result from Fire and
Air respectively-both qualities must change. 

This second method of coming-to-be, then, takes a longer time. But
(iii) if one quality in each of two 'elements' pass-away, the transformation,
though easier, is not reciprocal. Still, from Fire plus Water there
will result Earth and Air, and from Air plus Earth Fire and Water.
For there will be Air, when the cold of the Water and the dry of the
Fire have passed-away (since the hot of the latter and the moist of
the former are left): whereas, when the hot of the Fire and the moist
of the Water have passed-away, there will be Earth, owing to the survival
of the dry of the Fire and the cold of the Water. So, too, in the
same Way, Fire and Water will result from Air plus Earth. For there
will be Water, when the hot of the Air and the dry of the Earth have
passed-away (since the moist of the former and the cold of the latter
are left): whereas, when the moist of the Air and the cold of the
Earth have passed-away, there will be Fire, owing to the survival
of the hot of the Air and the dry of the Earth-qualities essentially
constitutive of Fire. Moreover, this mode of Fire's coming-to-be is
confirmed by perception. For flame is par excellence Fire: but flame
is burning smoke, and smoke consists of Air and Earth. 

No transformation, however, into any of the 'simple' bodies can result
from the passingaway of one elementary quality in each of two 'elements'
when they are taken in their consecutive order, because either identical
or contrary qualities are left in the pair: but no 'simple' body can
be formed either out of identical, or out of contrary, qualities.
Thus no 'simple' body would result, if the dry of Fire and the moist
of Air were to pass-away: for the hot is left in both. On the other
hand, if the hot pass-away out both, the contraries-dry and moist-are
left. A similar result will occur in all the others too: for all the
consecutive 'elements' contain one identical, and one contrary, quality.
Hence, too, it clearly follows that, when one of the consecutive 'elements'
is transformed into one, the coming-to-be is effected by the passing-away
of a single quality: whereas, when two of them are transformed into
a third, more than one quality must have passedaway. 

We have stated that all the 'elements' come-to-be out of any one of
them; and we have explained the manner in which their mutual conversion
takes place. Let us nevertheless supplement our theory by the following
speculations concerning them. 

Part 5

If Water, Air, and the like are a 'matter' of which the natural bodies
consist, as some thinkers in fact believe, these 'clements' must be
either one, or two, or more. Now they cannot all of them be one-they
cannot, e.g. all be Air or Water or Fire or Earth-because 'Change
is into contraries'. For if they all were Air, then (assuming Air
to persist) there will be 'alteration' instead of coming-to-be. Besides,
nobody supposes a single 'element' to persist, as the basis of all,
in such a way that it is Water as well as Air (or any other 'element')
at the same time. So there will be a certain contrariety, i.e. a differentiating
quality: and the other member of this contrariety, e.g. heat, will
belong to some other 'element', e.g. to Fire. But Fire will certainly
not be 'hot Air'. For a change of that kind (a) is 'alteration', and
(b) is not what is observed. Moreover (c) if Air is again to result
out of the Fire, it will do so by the conversion of the hot into its
contrary: this contrary, therefore, will belong to Air, and Air will
be a cold something: hence it is impossible for Fire to be 'hot Air',
since in that case the same thing will be simultaneously hot and cold.
Both Fire and Air, therefore, will be something else which is the
same; i.e. there will be some 'matter', other than either, common
to both. 

The same argument applies to all the 'elements', proving that there
is no single one of them out of which they all originate. But neither
is there, beside these four, some other body from which they originate-a
something intermediate, e.g. between Air and Water (coarser than Air,
but finer than Water), or between Air and Fire (coarser than Fire,
but finer than Air). For the supposed 'intermediate' will be Air and
Fire when a pair of contrasted qualities is added to it: but, since
one of every two contrary qualities is a 'privation', the 'intermediate'
never can exist-as some thinkers assert the 'Boundless' or the 'Environing'
exists-in isolation. It is, therefore, equally and indifferently any
one of the 'elements', or else it is nothing. 

Since, then, there is nothing-at least, nothing perceptible-prior
to these, they must be all. That being so, either they must always
persist and not be transformable into one another: or they must undergo
transformation-either all of them, or some only (as Plato wrote in
the Timacus).' Now it has been proved before that they must undergo
reciprocal transformation. It has also been proved that the speed
with which they come-to-be, one out of another, is not uniform-since
the process of reciprocal transformation is relatively quick between
the 'elements' with a 'complementary factor', but relatively slow
between those which possess no such factor. Assuming, then, that the
contrariety, in respect to which they are transformed, is one, the
elements' will inevitably be two: for it is 'matter' that is the 'mean'
between the two contraries, and matter is imperceptible and inseparable
from them. Since, however, the 'elements' are seen to be more than
two, the contrarieties must at the least be two. But the contrarieties
being two, the 'elements' must be four (as they evidently are) and
cannot be three: for the couplings' are four, since, though six are
possible, the two in which the qualities are contrary to one another
cannot occur. 

These subjects have been discussed before:' but the following arguments
will make it clear that, since the 'elements' are transformed into
one another, it is impossible for any one of them-whether it be at
the end or in the middle-to be an 'originative source' of the rest.
There can be no such 'originative element' at the ends: for all of
them would then be Fire or Earth, and this theory amounts to the assertion
that all things are made of Fire or Earth. Nor can a 'middle-element'
be such an originative source'-as some thinkers suppose that Air is
transformed both into Fire and into Water, and Water both into Air
and into Earth, while the 'end-elements' are not further transformed
into one another. For the process must come to a stop, and cannot
continue ad infinitum in a straight line in either direction, since
otherwise an infinite number of contrarieties would attach to the
single 'element'. Let E stand for Earth, W for Water, A for Air, and
F for Fire. Then (i) since A is transformed into F and W, there will
be a contrariety belonging to A F. Let these contraries be whiteness
and blackness. Again (ii) since A is transformed into W, there will
be another contrariety: for W is not the same as F. Let this second
contrariety be dryness and moistness, D being dryness and M moistness.
Now if, when A is transformed into W, the 'white' persists, Water
will be moist and white: but if it does not persist, Water will be
black since change is into contraries. Water, therefore, must be either
white or black. Let it then be the first. On similar grounds, therefore,
D (dryness) will also belong to F. Consequently F (Fire) as well as
Air will be able to be transformed into Water: for it has qualities
contrary to those of Water, since Fire was first taken to be black
and then to be dry, while Water was moist and then showed itself white.
Thus it is evident that all the 'elements' will be able to be transformed
out of one another; and that, in the instances we have taken, E (Earth)
also will contain the remaining two 'complementary factors', viz.
the black and the moist (for these have not yet been coupled).

We have dealt with this last topic before the thesis we set out to
prove. That thesis-viz. that the process cannot continue ad infinitum-will
be clear from the following considerations. If Fire (which is represented
by F) is not to revert, but is to be transformed in turn into some
other 'element' (e.g. into Q), a new contrariety, other than those
mentioned, will belong to Fire and Q: for it has been assumed that
Q is not the same as any of the four, E W A and F. Let K, then, belong
to F and Y to Q. Then K will belong to all four, E W A and F: for
they are transformed into one another. This last point, however, we
may admit, has not yet been proved: but at any rate it is clear that
if Q is to be transformed in turn into yet another 'element', yet
another contrariety will belong not only to Q but also to F (Fire).
And, similarly, every addition of a new 'element' will carry with
it the attachment of a new contrariety to the preceding elements'.
Consequently, if the 'elements' are infinitely many, there will also
belong to the single 'element' an infinite number of contrarieties.
But if that be so, it will be impossible to define any 'element':
impossible also for any to come-to-be. For if one is to result from
another, it will have to pass through such a vast number of contrarieties-and
indeed even more than any determinate number. Consequently (i) into
some 'elements' transformation will never be effected-viz. if the
intermediates are infinite in number, as they must be if the 'elements'
are infinitely many: further (ii) there will not even be a transformation
of Air into Fire, if the contrarieties are infinitely many: moreover
(iii) all the 'elements' become one. For all the contrarieties of
the 'elements' above F must belong to those below F, and vice versa:
hence they will all be one. 

Part 6

As for those who agree with Empedocles that the 'elements' of body
are more than one, so that they are not transformed into one another-one
may well wonder in what sense it is open to them to maintain that
the 'elements' are comparable. Yet Empedocles says 'For these are
all not only equal...' 

If it is meant that they are comparable in their amount, all the 'comparables'
must possess an identical something whereby they are measured. If,
e.g. one pint of Water yields ten of Air, both are measured by the
same unit; and therefore both were from the first an identical something.
On the other hand, suppose (ii) they are not 'comparable in their
amount' in the sense that so-much of the one yields so much of the
other, but comparable in 'power of action (a pint of Water, e.g. having
a power of cooling equal to that of ten pints of Air); even so, they
are 'comparable in their amount', though not qua 'amount' but qua
Iso-much power'. There is also (iii) a third possibility. Instead
of comparing their powers by the measure of their amount, they might
be compared as terms in a 'correspondence': e.g. 'as x is hot, so
correspondingly y is white'. But 'correspondence', though it means
equality in the quantum, means similarity in a quale. Thus it is manifestly
absurd that the 'simple' bodies, though they are not transformable,
are comparable not merely as 'corresponding', but by a measure of
their powers; i.e. that so-much Fire is comparable with many times-that-amount
of Air, as being 'equally' or 'similarly' hot. For the same thing,
if it be greater in amount, will, since it belongs to the same kind,
have its ratio correspondingly increased. 

A further objection to the theory of Empedocles is that it makes even
growth impossible, unless it be increase by addition. For his Fire
increases by Fire: 'And Earth increases its own frame and Ether increases
Ether." These, however, are cases of addition: but it is not by addition
that growing things are believed to increase. And it is far more difficult
for him to account for the coming-to-be which occurs in nature. For
the things which come-to-be by natural process all exhibit, in their
coming-to-be, a uniformity either absolute or highly regular: while
any exceptions any results which are in accordance neither with the
invariable nor with the general rule are products of chance and luck.
Then what is the cause determining that man comes-to-be from man,
that wheat (instead of an olive) comes-to-be from wheat, either invariably
or generally? Are we to say 'Bone comes-to-be if the "elements" be
put together in such-and such a manner'? For, according to his own
estatements, nothing comes-to-be from their 'fortuitous consilience',
but only from their 'consilience' in a certain proportion. What, then,
is the cause of this proportional consilience? Presumably not Fire
or Earth. But neither is it Love and Strife: for the former is a cause
of 'association' only, and the latter only of 'dissociation'. No:
the cause in question is the essential nature of each thing-not merely
to quote his words) 'a mingling and a divorce of what has been mingled'.
And chance, not proportion, 'is the name given to these occurrences':
for things can be 'mingled' fortuitously. 

The cause, therefore, of the coming-to-be of the things which owe
their existence to nature is that they are in such-and-such a determinate
condition: and it is this which constitutes, the 'nature' of each
thing-a 'nature' about which he says nothing. What he says, therefore,
is no explanation of 'nature'. Moreover, it is this which is both
'the excellence' of each thing and its 'good': whereas he assigns
the whole credit to the 'mingling'. (And yet the 'elements' at all
events are 'dissociated' not by Strife, but by Love: since the 'elements'
are by nature prior to the Deity, and they too are Deities.)

Again, his account of motion is vague. For it is not an adequate explanation
to say that 'Love and Strife set things moving, unless the very nature
of Love is a movement of this kind and the very nature of Strife a
movement of that kind. He ought, then, either to have defined or to
have postulated these characteristic movements, or to have demonstrated
them-whether strictly or laxly or in some other fashion. Moreover,
since (a) the 'simple' bodies appear to move 'naturally' as well as
by compulsion, i.e. in a manner contrary to nature (fire, e.g. appears
to move upwards without compulsion, though it appears to move by compulsion
downwards); and since (b) what is 'natural' is contrary to that which
is due to compulsion, and movement by compulsion actually occurs;
it follows that 'natural movement' can also occur in fact. Is this,
then, the movement that Love sets going? No: for, on the contrary,
the 'natural movement' moves Earth downwards and resembles 'dissociation',
and Strife rather than Love is its cause-so that in general, too,
Love rather than Strife would seem to be contrary to nature. And unless
Love or Strife is actually setting them in motion, the 'simple' bodies
themselves have absolutely no movement or rest. But this is paradoxical:
and what is more, they do in fact obviously move. For though Strife
'dissociated', it was not by Strife that the 'Ether' was borne upwards.
On the contrary, sometimes he attributes its movement to something
like chance ('For thus, as it ran, it happened to meet them then,
though often otherwise"), while at other times he says it is the nature
of Fire to be borne upwards, but 'the Ether' (to quote his words)
'sank down upon the Earth with long roots'. With such statements,
too, he combines the assertion that the Order of the World is the
same now, in the reign of Strife, as it was formerly in the reign
of Love. What, then, is the 'first mover' of the 'elements'? What
causes their motion? Presumably not Love and Strife: on the contrary,
these are causes of a particular motion, if at least we assume that
'first mover' to be an originative source'. 

An additional paradox is that the soul should consist of the 'elements',
or that it should be one of them. How are the soul's 'alterations'
to take Place? How, e.g. is the change from being musical to being
unmusical, or how is memory or forgetting, to occur? For clearly,
if the soul be Fire, only such modifications will happen to it as
characterize Fire qua Fire: while if it be compounded out of the elements',
only the corporeal modifications will occur in it. But the changes
we have mentioned are none of them corporeal. 

Part 7

The discussion of these difficulties, however, is a task appropriate
to a different investigation:' let us return to the 'elements' of
which bodies are composed. The theories that 'there is something common
to all the "elements"', and that they are reciprocally transformed',
are so related that those who accept either are bound to accept the
other as well. Those, on the other hand, who do not make their coming-to-be
reciprocal-who refuse to suppose that any one of the 'elements' comes-to-be
out of any other taken singly, except in the sense in which bricks
come-to-be out of a wall-are faced with a paradox. How, on their theory,
are flesh and bones or any of the other compounds to result from the
'elements' taken together? 

Indeed, the point we have raised constitutes a problem even for those
who generate the 'elements' out of one another. In what manner does
anything other than, and beside, the 'elements' come-to-be out of
them? Let me illustrate my meaning. Water can come-to-be out of Fire
and Fire out of Water; for their substralum is something common to
them both. But flesh too, presumably, and marrow come-to-be out of
them. How, then, do such things come to-be? For (a) how is the manner
of their coming-to-be to be conceived by those who maintain a theory
like that of Empedocles? They must conceive it as composition-just
as a wall comes-to-be out of bricks and stones: and the 'Mixture',
of which they speak, will be composed of the 'elements', these being
preserved in it unaltered but with their small particles juxtaposed
each to each. That will be the manner, presumably, in which flesh
and every other compound results from the 'elements'. Consequently,
it follows that Fire and Water do not come-to-be 'out of any and every
part of flesh'. For instance, although a sphere might come-to-be out
of this part of a lump of wax and a pyramid out of some other part,
it was nevertheless possible for either figure to have come-to-be
out of either part indifferently: that is the manner of coming-to-be
when 'both Fire and Water come-to-be out of any and every part of
flesh'. Those, however, who maintain the theory in question, are not
at liberty to conceive that 'both come-to-be out of flesh' in that
manner, but only as a stone and a brick 'both come-to-be out of a
wall'-viz. each out of a different place or part. Similarly (b) even
for those who postulate a single matter of their 'elements' there
is a certain difficulty in explaining how anything is to result from
two of them taken together-e.g. from 'cold' and hot', or from Fire
and Earth. For if flesh consists of both and is neither of them, nor
again is a 'composition' of them in which they are preserved unaltered,
what alternative is left except to identify the resultant of the two
'elements' with their matter? For the passingaway of either 'element'
produces either the other or the matter. 

Perhaps we may suggest the following solution. (i) There are differences
of degree in hot and cold. Although, therefore, when either is fully
real without qualification, the other will exist potentially; yet,
when neither exists in the full completeness of its being, but both
by combining destroy one another's excesses so that there exist instead
a hot which (for a 'hot') is cold and a cold which (for a 'cold')
is hot; then what results from these two contraries will be neither
their matter, nor either of them existing in its full reality without
qualification. There will result instead an 'intermediate': and this
'intermediate', according as it is potentially more hot than cold
or vice versa, will possess a power-of-heating that is double or triple
its power-of-cooling, or otherwise related thereto in some similar
ratio. Thus all the other bodies will result from the contraries,
or rather from the 'elements', in so far as these have been 'combined':
while the elements' will result from the contraries, in so far as
these 'exist potentially' in a special sense-not as matter 'exists
potentially', but in the sense explained above. And when a thing comes-to-be
in this manner, the process is cobination'; whereas what comes-to-be
in the other manner is matter. Moreover (ii) contraries also 'suffer
action', in accordance with the disjunctively-articulated definition
established in the early part of this work.' For the actually-hot
is potentially-cold and the actually cold potentially-hot; so that
hot and cold, unless they are equally balanced, are transformed into
one another (and all the other contraries behave in a similar way).
It is thus, then, that in the first place the 'elements' are transformed;
and that (in the second place) out of the 'elements' there come-to-be
flesh and bones and the like-the hot becoming cold and the cold becoming
hot when they have been brought to the 'mean'. For at the 'mean' is
neither hot nor cold. The 'mean', however, is of considerable extent
and not indivisible. Similarly, it is qua reduced to a 'mean' condition
that the dry and the moist, as well as the contraries we have used
as examples, produce flesh and bone and the remaining compounds.

Part 8

All the compound bodies-all of which exist in the region belonging
to the central body-are composed of all the 'simple' bodies. For they
all contain Earth because every 'simple' body is to be found specially
and most abundantly in its own place. And they all contain Water because
(a) the compound must possess a definite outline and Water, alone
of the 'simple' bodies, is readily adaptable in shape: moreover (b)
Earth has no power of cohesion without the moist. On the contrary,
the moist is what holds it together; for it would fall to pieces if
the moist were eliminated from it completely. 

They contain Earth and Water, then, for the reasons we have given:
and they contain Air and Fire, because these are contrary to Earth
and Water (Earth being contrary to Air and Water to Fire, in so far
as one Substance can be 'contrary' to another). Now all compounds
presuppose in their coming-to-be constituents which are contrary to
one another: and in all compounds there is contained one set of the
contrasted extremes. Hence the other set must be contained in them
also, so that every compound will include all the 'simple' bodies.

Additional evidence seems to be furnished by the food each compound
takes. For all of them are fed by substances which are the same as
their constituents, and all of them are fed by more substances than
one. Indeed, even the plants, though it might be thought they are
fed by one substance only, viz. by Water, are fed by more than one:
for Earth has been mixed with the Water. That is why farmers too endeavour
to mix before watering. Although food is akin to the matter, that
which is fed is the 'figure'-i.e. the 'form' taken along with the
matter. This fact enables us to understand why, whereas all the 'simple'
bodies come-to-be out of one another, Fire is the only one of them
which (as our predecessors also assert) 'is fed'. For Fire alone-or
more than all the rest-is akin to the 'form' because it tends by nature
to be borne towards the limit. Now each of them naturally tends to
be borne towards its own place; but the 'figure'-i.e. the 'form'-Of
them all is at the limits. 

Thus we have explained that all the compound bodies are composed of
all the 'simple' bodies. 

Part 9

Since some things are such as to come-to-be and pass-away, and since
coming-to-be in fact occurs in the region about the centre, we must
explain the number and the nature of the 'originative sources' of
all coming-to-be alike: for a grasp of the true theory of any universal
facilitates the understanding of its specific forms. 

The 'originative sources', then, of the things which come-to-be are
equal in number to, and identical in kind with, those in the sphere
of the eternal and primary things. For there is one in the sense of
'matter', and a second in the sense of 'form': and, in addition, the
third 'originative source' must be present as well. For the two first
are not sufficient to bring things into being, any more than they
are adequate to account for the primary things. 

Now cause, in the sense of material origin, for the things which are
such as to come-to-be is 'that which can be-and-not-be': and this
is identical with'that which can come-to-be-and-pass-away', since
the latter, while it is at one time, at another time is not. (For
whereas some things are of necessity, viz. the eternal things, others
of necessity are not. And of these two sets of things, since they
cannot diverge from the necessity of their nature, it is impossible
for the first not to he and impossible for the second to he. Other
things, however, can both be and not he.) Hence coming-to-be and passing-away
must occur within the field of 'that which can be-and not-be'. This,
therefore, is cause in the sense of material origin for the things
which are such as to come-to-be; while cause, in the sense of their
'end', is their 'figure' or 'form'-and that is the formula expressing
the essential nature of each of them. 

But the third 'originative source' must be present as well-the cause
vaguely dreamed of by all our predecessors, definitely stated by none
of them. On the contrary (a) some amongst them thought the nature
of 'the Forms' was adequate to account for coming-to-be. Thus Socrates
in the Phaedo first blames everybody else for having given no explanation;
and then lays it down; that 'some things are Forms, others Participants
in the Forms', and that 'while a thing is said to "be" in virtue of
the Form, it is said to "come-to-be" qua sharing in," to "pass-away"
qua "losing," the 'Form'. Hence he thinks that 'assuming the truth
of these theses, the Forms must be causes both of coming-to-be and
of passing-away'. On the other hand (b) there were others who thought
'the matter' was adequate by itself to account for coming-to-be, since
'the movement originates from the matter'. 

Neither of these theories, however, is sound. For (a) if the Forms
are causes, why is their generating activity intermittent instead
of perpetual and continuous-since there always are Participants as
well as Forms? Besides, in some instances we see that the cause is
other than the Form. For it is the doctor who implants health and
the man of science who implants science, although 'Health itself'
and 'Science itself' are as well as the Participants: and the same
principle applies to everything else that is produced in accordance
with an art. On the other hand (b) to say that 'matter generates owing
to its movement' would be, no doubt, more scientific than to make
such statements as are made by the thinkers we have been criticizing.
For what 'alters' and transfigures plays a greater part in bringing,
things into being; and we are everywhere accustomed, in the products
of nature and of art alike, to look upon that which can initiate movement
as the producing cause. Nevertheless this second theory is not right
either. 

For, to begin with, it is characteristic of matter to suffer action,
i.e. to be moved: but to move, i.e. to act, belongs to a different
'power'. This is obvious both in the things that come-to-be by art
and in those that come to-be by nature. Water does not of itself produce
out of itself an animal: and it is the art, not the wood, that makes
a bed. Nor is this their only error. They make a second mistake in
omitting the more controlling cause: for they eliminate the essential
nature, i.e. the 'form'. And what is more, since they remove the formal
cause, they invest the forces they assign to the 'simple' bodies-the
forces which enable these bodies to bring things into being-with too
instrumental a character. For 'since' (as they say) 'it is the nature
of the hot to dissociate, of the cold to bring together, and of each
remaining contrary either to act or to suffer action', it is out of
such materials and by their agency (so they maintain) that everything
else comes-to-be and passes-away. Yet (a) it is evident that even
Fire is itself moved, i.e. suffers action. Moreover (b) their procedure
is virtually the same as if one were to treat the saw (and the various
instruments of carpentry) as 'the cause' of the things that come-to-be:
for the wood must be divided if a man saws, must become smooth if
he planes, and so on with the remaining tools. Hence, however true
it may be that Fire is active, i.e. sets things moving, there is a
further point they fail to observe-viz. that Fire is inferior to the
tools or instruments in the manner in which it sets things moving.

Part 10

As to our own theory-we have given a general account of the causes
in an earlier work,' we have now explained and distinguished the 'matter'
and the 'form'. Further, since the change which is motion has been
proved' to be eternal, the continuity of the occurrence of coming-to-be
follows necessarily from what we have established: for the eternal
motion, by causing 'the generator' to approach and retire, will produce
coming-to-be uninterruptedly. At the same time it is clear that we
were right when, in an earlier work,' we called motion (not coming-to-be)
'the primary form of change'. For it is far more reasonable that what
is should cause the coming-to-be of what is not, than that what is
not should cause the being of what is. Now that which is being moved
is, but that which is coming-to-be is not: hence, also, motion is
prior to coming-to-be. 

We have assumed, and have proved, that coming-to-be and passing-away
happen to things continuously; and we assert that motion causes coming-to-be.
That being so, it is evident that, if the motion be single, both processes
cannot occur since they are contrary to one another: for it is a law
of nature that the same cause, provided it remain in the same condition,
always produces the same effect, so that, from a single motion, either
coming-to-be or passing-away will always result. The movements must,
on the contrary, be more than one, and they must be contrasted with
one another either by the sense of their motion or by its irregularity:
for contrary effects demand contraries as their causes. 

This explains why it is not the primary motion that causes coming-to-be
and passingaway, but the motion along the inclined circle: for this
motion not only possesses the necessary continuity, but includes a
duality of movements as well. For if coming-to-be and passing-away
are always to be continuous, there must be some body always being
moved (in order that these changes may not fail) and moved with a
duality of movements (in order that both changes, not one only, may
result). Now the continuity of this movement is caused by the motion
of the whole: but the approaching and retreating of the moving body
are caused by the inclination. For the consequence of the inclination
is that the body becomes alternately remote and near; and since its
distance is thus unequal, its movement will be irregular. Therefore,
if it generates by approaching and by its proximity, it-this very
same body-destroys by retreating and becoming remote: and if it generates
by many successive approaches, it also destroys by many successive
retirements. For contrary effects demand contraries as their causes;
and the natural processes of passing-away and coming-to-be occupy
equal periods of time. Hence, too, the times-i.e. the lives-of the
several kinds of living things have a number by which they are distinguished:
for there is an Order controlling all things, and every time (i.e.
every life) is measured by a period. Not all of them, however, are
measured by the same period, but some by a smaller and others by a
greater one: for to some of them the period, which is their measure,
is a year, while to some it is longer and to others shorter.

And there are facts of observation in manifest agreement with our
theories. Thus we see that coming-to-be occurs as the sun approaches
and decay as it retreats; and we see that the two processes occupy
equal times. For the durations of the natural processes of passing-away
and coming-to-be are equal. Nevertheless it Often happens that things
pass-away in too short a time. This is due to the 'intermingling'
by which the things that come-to-be and pass-away are implicated with
one another. For their matter is 'irregular', i.e. is not everywhere
the same: hence the processes by which they come-to-be must be 'irregular'
too, i.e. some too quick and others too slow. Consequently the phenomenon
in question occurs, because the 'irregular' coming-to-be of these
things is the passing-away of other things. 

Coming-to-be and passing-away will, as we have said, always be continuous,
and will never fail owing to the cause we stated. And this continuity
has a sufficient reason on our theory. For in all things, as we affirm,
Nature always strives after 'the better'. Now 'being' (we have explained
elsewhere the exact variety of meanings we recognize in this term)
is better than 'not-being': but not all things can possess 'being',
since they are too far removed from the 'originative source. 'God
therefore adopted the remaining alternative, and fulfilled the perfection
of the universe by making coming-to-be uninterrupted: for the greatest
possible coherence would thus be secured to existence, because that
'coming-to-be should itself come-to-be perpetually' is the closest
approximation to eternal being. 

The cause of this perpetuity of coming-to-be, as we have often said,
is circular motion: for that is the only motion which is continuous.
That, too, is why all the other things-the things, I mean, which are
reciprocally transformed in virtue of their 'passions' and their 'powers
of action' e.g. the 'simple' bodiesimitate circular motion. For when
Water is transformed into Air, Air into Fire, and the Fire back into
Water, we say the coming-to-be 'has completed the circle', because
it reverts again to the beginning. Hence it is by imitating circular
motion that rectilinear motion too is continuous. 

These considerations serve at the same time to explain what is to
some people a baffling problem-viz. why the 'simple' bodies, since
each them is travelling towards its own place, have not become dissevered
from one another in the infinite lapse of time. The reason is their
reciprocal transformation. For, had each of them persisted in its
own place instead of being transformed by its neighbour, they would
have got dissevered long ago. They are transformed, however, owing
to the motion with its dual character: and because they are transformed,
none of them is able to persist in any place allotted to it by the
Order. 

It is clear from what has been said (i) that coming-to-be and passing-away
actually occur, (ii) what causes them, and (iii) what subject undergoes
them. But (a) if there is to be movement (as we have explained elsewhere,
in an earlier work') there must be something which initiates it; if
there is to be movement always, there must always be something which
initiates it; if the movement is to be continuous, what initiates
it must be single, unmoved, ungenerated, and incapable of 'alteration';
and if the circular movements are more than one, their initiating
causes must all of them, in spite of their plurality, be in some way
subordinated to a single 'originative source'. Further (b) since time
is continuous, movement must be continuous, inasmuch as there can
be no time without movement. Time, therefore, is a 'number' of some
continuous movement-a 'number', therefore, of the circular movement,
as was established in the discussions at the beginning. But (c) is
movement continuous because of the continuity of that which is moved,
or because that in which the movement occurs (I mean, e.g. the place
or the quality) is continuous? The answer must clearly be 'because
that which is moved is continuous'. (For how can the quality be continuous
except in virtue of the continuity of the thing to which it belongs?
But if the continuity of 'that in which' contributes to make the movement
continuous, this is true only of 'the place in which'; for that has
'magnitude' in a sense.) But (d) amongst continuous bodies which are
moved, only that which is moved in a circle is 'continuous' in such
a way that it preserves its continuity with itself throughout the
movement. The conclusion therefore is that this is what produces continuous
movement, viz. the body which is being moved in a circle; and its
movement makes time continuous. 

Part 11

Wherever there is continuity in any process (coming-to-be or 'alteration'
or any kind of change whatever) we observe consecutiveness', i.e.
this coming-to-be after that without any interval. Hence we must investigate
whether, amongst the consecutive members, there is any whose future
being is necessary; or whether, on the contrary, every one of them
may fail to come-to-be. For that some of them may fail to occur, is
clear. (a) We need only appeal to the distinction between the statements
'x will be' and 'x is about to which depends upon this fact. For if
it be true to say of x that it 'will be', it must at some time be
true to say of it that 'it is': whereas, though it be true to say
of x now that 'it is about to occur', it is quite possible for it
not to come-to-be-thus a man might not walk, though he is now 'about
to' walk. And (b) since (to appeal to a general principle) amongst
the things which 'are' some are capable also of 'not-being', it is
clear that the same ambiguous character will attach to them no less
when they are coming-to-be: in other words, their coming-to-be will
not be necessary. 

Then are all the things that come-to-be of this contingent character?
Or, on the contrary, is it absolutely necessary for some of them to
come-to-be? Is there, in fact, a distinction in the field of 'coming-to-be'
corresponding to the distinction, within the field of 'being', between
things that cannot possibly 'not-be' and things that can 'not-be'?
For instance, is it necessary that solstices shall come-to-be, i.e.
impossible that they should fail to be able to occur? 

Assuming that the antecedent must have come-to-be if the consequent
is to be (e.g. that foundations must have come-to-be if there is to
be a house: clay, if there are to be foundations), is the converse
also true? If foundations have come-to-be, must a house come-to-be?
The answer seems to be that the necessary nexus no longer holds, unless
it is 'necessary' for the consequent (as well as for the antecedent)
to come-to-be-'necessary' absolutely. If that be the case, however,
'a house must come to-be if foundations have come-to-be', as well
as vice versa. For the antecedent was assumed to be so related to
the consequent that, if the latter is to be, the antecedent must have
come-tobe before it. If, therefore, it is necessary that the consequent
should come-to-be, the antecedent also must have come-to-be: and if
the antecedent has come-to-be, then the consequent also must come-to-be-not,
however, because of the antecedent, but because the future being of
the consequent was assumed as necessary. Hence, in any sequence, when
the being of the consequent is necessary, the nexus is reciprocal-in
other words, when the antecedent has come-to-be the consequent must
always come-to-be too. 

Now (i) if the sequence of occurrences is to proceed ad infinitum
'downwards', the coming to-be of any determinate 'this' amongst the
later members of the sequence will not be absolutely, but only conditionally,
necessary. For it will always be necessary that some other member
shall have come-to-be before 'this' as the presupposed condition of
the necessity that 'this' should come-to-be: consequently, since what
is 'infinite' has no 'originative source', neither will there be in
the infinite sequence any 'primary' member which will make it 'necessary'
for the remaining members to come-to-be. 

Nor again (ii) will it be possible to say with truth, even in regard
to the members of a limited sequence, that it is 'absolutely necessary'
for any one of them to come-to-be. We cannot truly say, e.g. that
'it is absolutely necessary for a house to come-to-be when foundations
have been laid': for (unless it is always necessary for a house to
be coming-to-be) we should be faced with the consequence that, when
foundations have been laid, a thing, which need not always be, must
always be. No: if its coming-to-be is to be 'necessary', it must be
'always' in its coming-to-be. For what is 'of necessity' coincides
with what is 'always', since that which 'must be' cannot possibly
'not-be'. Hence a thing is eternal if its 'being' is necessary: and
if it is eternal, its 'being' is necessary. And if, therefore, the
'coming-to-be' of a thing is necessary, its 'coming-to-be' is eternal;
and if eternal, necessary. 

It follows that the coming-to-be of anything, if it is absolutely
necessary, must be cyclical-i.e. must return upon itself. For coming
to-be must either be limited or not limited: and if not limited, it
must be either rectilinear or cyclical. But the first of these last
two alternatives is impossible if coming-to-be is to be eternal, because
there could not be any 'originative source' whatever in an infinite
rectilinear sequence, whether its members be taken 'downwards' (as
future events) or 'upwards' (as past events). Yet coming-to-be must
have an 'originative source' (if it is to be necessary and therefore
eternal), nor can it be eternal if it is limited. Consequently it
must be cyclical. Hence the nexus must be reciprocal. By this I mean
that the necessary occurrence of 'this' involves the necessary occurrence
of its antecedent: and conversely that, given the antecedent, it is
also necessary for the consequent to come-to-be. And this reciprocal
nexus will hold continuously throughout the sequence: for it makes
no difference whether the reciprocal nexus, of which we are speaking,
is mediated by two, or by many, members. 

It is in circular movement, therefore, and in cyclical coming-to-be
that the 'absolutely necessary' is to be found. In other words, if
the coming-to-be of any things is cyclical, it is 'necessary' that
each of them is coming-to-be and has come-to-be: and if the coming-to-be
of any things is 'necessary', their coming-to-be is cyclical.

The result we have reached is logically concordant with the eternity
of circular motion, i.e. the eternity of the revolution of the heavens
(a fact which approved itself on other and independent evidence),'
since precisely those movements which belong to, and depend upon,
this eternal revolution 'come-to-be' of necessity, and of necessity
'will be'. For since the revolving body is always setting something
else in motion, the movement of the things it moves must also be circular.
Thus, from the being of the 'upper revolution' it follows that the
sun revolves in this determinate manner; and since the sun revolves
thus, the seasons in consequence come-to-be in a cycle, i.e. return
upon themselves; and since they come-to-be cyclically, so in their
turn do the things whose coming-to-be the seasons initiate.

Then why do some things manifestly come to-be in this cyclical fashion
(as, e.g. showers and air, so that it must rain if there is to be
a cloud and, conversely, there must be a cloud if it is to rain),
while men and animals do not 'return upon themselves' so that the
same individual comes-to-be a second time (for though your coming-to-be
presupposes your father's, his coming-to-be does not presuppose yours)?
Why, on the contrary, does this coming-to-be seem to constitute a
rectilinear sequence? 

In discussing this new problem, we must begin by inquiring whether
all things 'return upon themselves' in a uniform manner; or whether,
on the contrary, though in some sequences what recurs is numerically
the same, in other sequences it is the same only in species. In consequence
of this distinction, it is evident that those things, whose 'substance'-that
which is undergoing the process-is imperishable, will be numerically,
as well as specifically, the same in their recurrence: for the character
of the process is determined by the character of that which undergoes
it. Those things, on the other hand, whose 'substance' is perish,
able (not imperishable) must 'return upon themselves' in the sense
that what recurs, though specifically the same, is not the same numerically.
That why, when Water comes-to-be from Air and Air from Water, the
Air is the same 'specifically', not 'numerically': and if these too
recur numerically the same, at any rate this does not happen with
things whose 'substance' comes-to-be-whose 'substance' is such that
it is essentially capable of not-being. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

The science which has to do with nature clearly concerns itself for
the most part with bodies and magnitudes and their properties and
movements, but also with the principles of this sort of substance,
as many as they may be. For of things constituted by nature some are
bodies and magnitudes, some possess body and magnitude, and some are
principles of things which possess these. Now a continuum is that
which is divisible into parts always capable of subdivision, and a
body is that which is every way divisible. A magnitude if divisible
one way is a line, if two ways a surface, and if three a body. Beyond
these there is no other magnitude, because the three dimensions are
all that there are, and that which is divisible in three directions
is divisible in all. For, as the Pythagoreans say, the world and all
that is in it is determined by the number three, since beginning and
middle and end give the number of an 'all', and the number they give
is the triad. And so, having taken these three from nature as (so
to speak) laws of it, we make further use of the number three in the
worship of the Gods. Further, we use the terms in practice in this
way. Of two things, or men, we say 'both', but not 'all': three is
the first number to which the term 'all' has been appropriated. And
in this, as we have said, we do but follow the lead which nature gives.
Therefore, since 'every' and 'all' and 'complete' do not differ from
one another in respect of form, but only, if at all, in their matter
and in that to which they are applied, body alone among magnitudes
can be complete. For it alone is determined by the three dimensions,
that is, is an 'all'. But if it is divisible in three dimensions it
is every way divisible, while the other magnitudes are divisible in
one dimension or in two alone: for the divisibility and continuity
of magnitudes depend upon the number of the dimensions, one sort being
continuous in one direction, another in two, another in all. All magnitudes,
then, which are divisible are also continuous. Whether we can also
say that whatever is continuous is divisible does not yet, on our
present grounds, appear. One thing, however, is clear. We cannot pass
beyond body to a further kind, as we passed from length to surface,
and from surface to body. For if we could, it would cease to be true
that body is complete magnitude. We could pass beyond it only in virtue
of a defect in it; and that which is complete cannot be defective,
since it has being in every respect. Now bodies which are classed
as parts of the whole are each complete according to our formula,
since each possesses every dimension. But each is determined relatively
to that part which is next to it by contact, for which reason each
of them is in a sense many bodies. But the whole of which they are
parts must necessarily be complete, and thus, in accordance with the
meaning of the word, have being, not in some respect only, but in
every respect. 

Part 2

The question as to the nature of the whole, whether it is infinite
in size or limited in its total mass, is a matter for subsequent inquiry.
We will now speak of those parts of the whole which are specifically
distinct. Let us take this as our starting-point. All natural bodies
and magnitudes we hold to be, as such, capable of locomotion; for
nature, we say, is their principle of movement. But all movement that
is in place, all locomotion, as we term it, is either straight or
circular or a combination of these two, which are the only simple
movements. And the reason of this is that these two, the straight
and the circular line, are the only simple magnitudes. Now revolution
about the centre is circular motion, while the upward and downward
movements are in a straight line, 'upward' meaning motion away from
the centre, and 'downward' motion towards it. All simple motion, then,
must be motion either away from or towards or about the centre. This
seems to be in exact accord with what we said above: as body found
its completion in three dimensions, so its movement completes itself
in three forms. 

Bodies are either simple or compounded of such; and by simple bodies
I mean those which possess a principle of movement in their own nature,
such as fire and earth with their kinds, and whatever is akin to them.
Necessarily, then, movements also will be either simple or in some
sort compound-simple in the case of the simple bodies, compound in
that of the composite-and in the latter case the motion will be that
of the simple body which prevails in the composition. Supposing, then,
that there is such a thing as simple movement, and that circular movement
is an instance of it, and that both movement of a simple body is simple
and simple movement is of a simple body (for if it is movement of
a compound it will be in virtue of a prevailing simple element), then
there must necessarily be some simple body which revolves naturally
and in virtue of its own nature with a circular movement. By constraint,
of course, it may be brought to move with the motion of something
else different from itself, but it cannot so move naturally, since
there is one sort of movement natural to each of the simple bodies.
Again, if the unnatural movement is the contrary of the natural and
a thing can have no more than one contrary, it will follow that circular
movement, being a simple motion, must be unnatural, if it is not natural,
to the body moved. If then (1) the body, whose movement is circular,
is fire or some other element, its natural motion must be the contrary
of the circular motion. But a single thing has a single contrary;
and upward and downward motion are the contraries of one another.
If, on the other hand, (2) the body moving with this circular motion
which is unnatural to it is something different from the elements,
there will be some other motion which is natural to it. But this cannot
be. For if the natural motion is upward, it will be fire or air, and
if downward, water or earth. Further, this circular motion is necessarily
primary. For the perfect is naturally prior to the imperfect, and
the circle is a perfect thing. This cannot be said of any straight
line:-not of an infinite line; for, if it were perfect, it would have
a limit and an end: nor of any finite line; for in every case there
is something beyond it, since any finite line can be extended. And
so, since the prior movement belongs to the body which naturally prior,
and circular movement is prior to straight, and movement in a straight
line belongs to simple bodies-fire moving straight upward and earthy
bodies straight downward towards the centre-since this is so, it follows
that circular movement also must be the movement of some simple body.
For the movement of composite bodies is, as we said, determined by
that simple body which preponderates in the composition. These premises
clearly give the conclusion that there is in nature some bodily substance
other than the formations we know, prior to them all and more divine
than they. But it may also be proved as follows. We may take it that
all movement is either natural or unnatural, and that the movement
which is unnatural to one body is natural to another-as, for instance,
is the case with the upward and downward movements, which are natural
and unnatural to fire and earth respectively. It necessarily follows
that circular movement, being unnatural to these bodies, is the natural
movement of some other. Further, if, on the one hand, circular movement
is natural to something, it must surely be some simple and primary
body which is ordained to move with a natural circular motion, as
fire is ordained to fly up and earth down. If, on the other hand,
the movement of the rotating bodies about the centre is unnatural,
it would be remarkable and indeed quite inconceivable that this movement
alone should be continuous and eternal, being nevertheless contrary
to nature. At any rate the evidence of all other cases goes to show
that it is the unnatural which quickest passes away. And so, if, as
some say, the body so moved is fire, this movement is just as unnatural
to it as downward movement; for any one can see that fire moves in
a straight line away from the centre. On all these grounds, therefore,
we may infer with confidence that there is something beyond the bodies
that are about us on this earth, different and separate from them;
and that the superior glory of its nature is proportionate to its
distance from this world of ours. 

Part 3

In consequence of what has been said, in part by way of assumption
and in part by way of proof, it is clear that not every body either
possesses lightness or heaviness. As a preliminary we must explain
in what sense we are using the words 'heavy' and 'light', sufficiently,
at least, for our present purpose: we can examine the terms more closely
later, when we come to consider their essential nature. Let us then
apply the term 'heavy' to that which naturally moves towards the centre,
and 'light' to that which moves naturally away from the centre. The
heaviest thing will be that which sinks to the bottom of all things
that move downward, and the lightest that which rises to the surface
of everything that moves upward. Now, necessarily, everything which
moves either up or down possesses lightness or heaviness or both-but
not both relatively to the same thing: for things are heavy and light
relatively to one another; air, for instance, is light relatively
to water, and water light relatively to earth. The body, then, which
moves in a circle cannot possibly possess either heaviness or lightness.
For neither naturally nor unnaturally can it move either towards or
away from the centre. Movement in a straight line certainly does not
belong to it naturally, since one sort of movement is, as we saw,
appropriate to each simple body, and so we should be compelled to
identify it with one of the bodies which move in this way. Suppose,
then, that the movement is unnatural. In that case, if it is the downward
movement which is unnatural, the upward movement will be natural;
and if it is the upward which is unnatural, the downward will be natural.
For we decided that of contrary movements, if the one is unnatural
to anything, the other will be natural to it. But since the natural
movement of the whole and of its part of earth, for instance, as a
whole and of a small clod-have one and the same direction, it results,
in the first place, that this body can possess no lightness or heaviness
at all (for that would mean that it could move by its own nature either
from or towards the centre, which, as we know, is impossible); and,
secondly, that it cannot possibly move in the way of locomotion by
being forced violently aside in an upward or downward direction. For
neither naturally nor unnaturally can it move with any other motion
but its own, either itself or any part of it, since the reasoning
which applies to the whole applies also to the part. 

It is equally reasonable to assume that this body will be ungenerated
and indestructible and exempt from increase and alteration, since
everything that comes to be comes into being from its contrary and
in some substrate, and passes away likewise in a substrate by the
action of the contrary into the contrary, as we explained in our opening
discussions. Now the motions of contraries are contrary. If then this
body can have no contrary, because there can be no contrary motion
to the circular, nature seems justly to have exempted from contraries
the body which was to be ungenerated and indestructible. For it is
in contraries that generation and decay subsist. Again, that which
is subject to increase increases upon contact with a kindred body,
which is resolved into its matter. But there is nothing out of which
this body can have been generated. And if it is exempt from increase
and diminution, the same reasoning leads us to suppose that it is
also unalterable. For alteration is movement in respect of quality;
and qualitative states and dispositions, such as health and disease,
do not come into being without changes of properties. But all natural
bodies which change their properties we see to be subject without
exception to increase and diminution. This is the case, for instance,
with the bodies of animals and their parts and with vegetable bodies,
and similarly also with those of the elements. And so, if the body
which moves with a circular motion cannot admit of increase or diminution,
it is reasonable to suppose that it is also unalterable.

The reasons why the primary body is eternal and not subject to increase
or diminution, but unaging and unalterable and unmodified, will be
clear from what has been said to any one who believes in our assumptions.
Our theory seems to confirm experience and to be confirmed by it.
For all men have some conception of the nature of the gods, and all
who believe in the existence of gods at all, whether barbarian or
Greek, agree in allotting the highest place to the deity, surely because
they suppose that immortal is linked with immortal and regard any
other supposition as inconceivable. If then there is, as there certainly
is, anything divine, what we have just said about the primary bodily
substance was well said. The mere evidence of the senses is enough
to convince us of this, at least with human certainty. For in the
whole range of time past, so far as our inherited records reach, no
change appears to have taken place either in the whole scheme of the
outermost heaven or in any of its proper parts. The common name, too,
which has been handed down from our distant ancestors even to our
own day, seems to show that they conceived of it in the fashion which
we have been expressing. The same ideas, one must believe, recur in
men's minds not once or twice but again and again. And so, implying
that the primary body is something else beyond earth, fire, air, and
water, they gave the highest place a name of its own, aither, derived
from the fact that it 'runs always' for an eternity of time. Anaxagoras,
however, scandalously misuses this name, taking aither as equivalent
to fire. 

It is also clear from what has been said why the number of what we
call simple bodies cannot be greater than it is. The motion of a simple
body must itself be simple, and we assert that there are only these
two simple motions, the circular and the straight, the latter being
subdivided into motion away from and motion towards the centre.

Part 4

That there is no other form of motion opposed as contrary to the circular
may be proved in various ways. In the first place, there is an obvious
tendency to oppose the straight line to the circular. For concave
and convex are a not only regarded as opposed to one another, but
they are also coupled together and treated as a unity in opposition
to the straight. And so, if there is a contrary to circular motion,
motion in a straight line must be recognized as having the best claim
to that name. But the two forms of rectilinear motion are opposed
to one another by reason of their places; for up and down is a difference
and a contrary opposition in place. Secondly, it may be thought that
the same reasoning which holds good of the rectilinear path applies
also the circular, movement from A to B being opposed as contrary
to movement from B to A. But what is meant is still rectilinear motion.
For that is limited to a single path, while the circular paths which
pass through the same two points are infinite in number. Even if we
are confined to the single semicircle and the opposition is between
movement from C to D and from D to C along that semicircle, the case
is no better. For the motion is the same as that along the diameter,
since we invariably regard the distance between two points as the
length of the straight line which joins them. It is no more satisfactory
to construct a circle and treat motion 'along one semicircle as contrary
to motion along the other. For example, taking a complete circle,
motion from E to F on the semicircle G may be opposed to motion from
F to E on the semicircle H. But even supposing these are contraries,
it in no way follows that the reverse motions on the complete circumference
contraries. Nor again can motion along the circle from A to B be regarded
as the contrary of motion from A to C: for the motion goes from the
same point towards the same point, and contrary motion was distinguished
as motion from a contrary to its contrary. And even if the motion
round a circle is the contrary of the reverse motion, one of the two
would be ineffective: for both move to the same point, because that
which moves in a circle, at whatever point it begins, must necessarily
pass through all the contrary places alike. (By contrarieties of place
I mean up and down, back and front, and right and left; and the contrary
oppositions of movements are determined by those of places.) One of
the motions, then, would be ineffective, for if the two motions were
of equal strength, there would be no movement either way, and if one
of the two were preponderant, the other would be inoperative. So that
if both bodies were there, one of them, inasmuch as it would not be
moving with its own movement, would be useless, in the sense in which
a shoe is useless when it is not worn. But God and nature create nothing
that has not its use. 

Part 5

This being clear, we must go on to consider the questions which remain.
First, is there an infinite body, as the majority of the ancient philosophers
thought, or is this an impossibility? The decision of this question,
either way, is not unimportant, but rather all-important, to our search
for the truth. It is this problem which has practically always been
the source of the differences of those who have written about nature
as a whole. So it has been and so it must be; since the least initial
deviation from the truth is multiplied later a thousandfold. Admit,
for instance, the existence of a minimum magnitude, and you will find
that the minimum which you have introduced, small as it is, causes
the greatest truths of mathematics to totter. The reason is that a
principle is great rather in power than in extent; hence that which
was small at the start turns out a giant at the end. Now the conception
of the infinite possesses this power of principles, and indeed in
the sphere of quantity possesses it in a higher degree than any other
conception; so that it is in no way absurd or unreasonable that the
assumption that an infinite body exists should be of peculiar moment
to our inquiry. The infinite, then, we must now discuss, opening the
whole matter from the beginning. 

Every body is necessarily to be classed either as simple or as composite;
the infinite body, therefore, will be either simple or composite.

But it is clear, further, that if the simple bodies are finite, the
composite must also be finite, since that which is composed of bodies
finite both in number and in magnitude is itself finite in respect
of number and magnitude: its quantity is in fact the same as that
of the bodies which compose it. What remains for us to consider, then,
is whether any of the simple bodies can be infinite in magnitude,
or whether this is impossible. Let us try the primary body first,
and then go on to consider the others. 

The body which moves in a circle must necessarily be finite in every
respect, for the following reasons. (1) If the body so moving is infinite,
the radii drawn from the centre will be infinite. But the space between
infinite radii is infinite: and by the space between the radii I mean
the area outside which no magnitude which is in contact with the two
lines can be conceived as falling. This, I say, will be infinite:
first, because in the case of finite radii it is always finite; and
secondly, because in it one can always go on to a width greater than
any given width; thus the reasoning which forces us to believe in
infinite number, because there is no maximum, applies also to the
space between the radii. Now the infinite cannot be traversed, and
if the body is infinite the interval between the radii is necessarily
infinite: circular motion therefore is an impossibility. Yet our eyes
tell us that the heavens revolve in a circle, and by argument also
we have determined that there is something to which circular movement
belongs. 

(2) Again, if from a finite time a finite time be subtracted, what
remains must be finite and have a beginning. And if the time of a
journey has a beginning, there must be a beginning also of the movement,
and consequently also of the distance traversed. This applies universally.
Take a line, ACE, infinite in one direction, E, and another line,
BB, infinite in both directions. Let ACE describe a circle, revolving
upon C as centre. In its movement it will cut BB continuously for
a certain time. This will be a finite time, since the total time is
finite in which the heavens complete their circular orbit, and consequently
the time subtracted from it, during which the one line in its motion
cuts the other, is also finite. Therefore there will be a point at
which ACE began for the first time to cut BB. This, however, is impossible.
The infinite, then, cannot revolve in a circle; nor could the world,
if it were infinite. 

(3) That the infinite cannot move may also be shown as follows. Let
A be a finite line moving past the finite line, B. Of necessity A
will pass clear of B and B of A at the same moment; for each overlaps
the other to precisely the same extent. Now if the two were both moving,
and moving in contrary directions, they would pass clear of one another
more rapidly; if one were still and the other moving past it, less
rapidly; provided that the speed of the latter were the same in both
cases. This, however, is clear: that it is impossible to traverse
an infinite line in a finite time. Infinite time, then, would be required.
(This we demonstrated above in the discussion of movement.) And it
makes no difference whether a finite is passing by an infinite or
an infinite by a finite. For when A is passing B, then B overlaps
A and it makes no difference whether B is moved or unmoved, except
that, if both move, they pass clear of one another more quickly. It
is, however, quite possible that a moving line should in certain cases
pass one which is stationary quicker than it passes one moving in
an opposite direction. One has only to imagine the movement to be
slow where both move and much faster where one is stationary. To suppose
one line stationary, then, makes no difficulty for our argument, since
it is quite possible for A to pass B at a slower rate when both are
moving than when only one is. If, therefore, the time which the finite
moving line takes to pass the other is infinite, then necessarily
the time occupied by the motion of the infinite past the finite is
also infinite. For the infinite to move at all is thus absolutely
impossible; since the very smallest movement conceivable must take
an infinity of time. Moreover the heavens certainly revolve, and they
complete their circular orbit in a finite time; so that they pass
round the whole extent of any line within their orbit, such as the
finite line AB. The revolving body, therefore, cannot be infinite.

(4) Again, as a line which has a limit cannot be infinite, or, if
it is infinite, is so only in length, so a surface cannot be infinite
in that respect in which it has a limit; or, indeed, if it is completely
determinate, in any respect whatever. Whether it be a square or a
circle or a sphere, it cannot be infinite, any more than a foot-rule
can. There is then no such thing as an infinite sphere or square or
circle, and where there is no circle there can be no circular movement,
and similarly where there is no infinite at all there can be no infinite
movement; and from this it follows that, an infinite circle being
itself an impossibility, there can be no circular motion of an infinite
body. 

(5) Again, take a centre C, an infinite line, AB, another infinite
line at right angles to it, E, and a moving radius, CD. CD will never
cease contact with E, but the position will always be something like
CE, CD cutting E at F. The infinite line, therefore, refuses to complete
the circle. 

(6) Again, if the heaven is infinite and moves in a circle, we shall
have to admit that in a finite time it has traversed the infinite.
For suppose the fixed heaven infinite, and that which moves within
it equal to it. It results that when the infinite body has completed
its revolution, it has traversed an infinite equal to itself in a
finite time. But that we know to be impossible. 

(7) It can also be shown, conversely, that if the time of revolution
is finite, the area traversed must also be finite; but the area traversed
was equal to itself; therefore, it is itself finite. 

We have now shown that the body which moves in a circle is not endless
or infinite, but has its limit. 

Part 6

Further, neither that which moves towards nor that which moves away
from the centre can be infinite. For the upward and downward motions
are contraries and are therefore motions towards contrary places.
But if one of a pair of contraries is determinate, the other must
be determinate also. Now the centre is determined; for, from whatever
point the body which sinks to the bottom starts its downward motion,
it cannot go farther than the centre. The centre, therefore, being
determinate, the upper place must also be determinate. But if these
two places are determined and finite, the corresponding bodies must
also be finite. Further, if up and down are determinate, the intermediate
place is also necessarily determinate. For, if it is indeterminate,
the movement within it will be infinite; and that we have already
shown to be an impossibility. The middle region then is determinate,
and consequently any body which either is in it, or might be in it,
is determinate. But the bodies which move up and down may be in it,
since the one moves naturally away from the centre and the other towards
it. 

From this alone it is clear that an infinite body is an impossibility;
but there is a further point. If there is no such thing as infinite
weight, then it follows that none of these bodies can be infinite.
For the supposed infinite body would have to be infinite in weight.
(The same argument applies to lightness: for as the one supposition
involves infinite weight, so the infinity of the body which rises
to the surface involves infinite lightness.) This is proved as follows.
Assume the weight to be finite, and take an infinite body, AB, of
the weight C. Subtract from the infinite body a finite mass, BD, the
weight of which shall be E. E then is less than C, since it is the
weight of a lesser mass. Suppose then that the smaller goes into the
greater a certain number of times, and take BF bearing the same proportion
to BD which the greater weight bears to the smaller. For you may subtract
as much as you please from an infinite. If now the masses are proportionate
to the weights, and the lesser weight is that of the lesser mass,
the greater must be that of the greater. The weights, therefore, of
the finite and of the infinite body are equal. Again, if the weight
of a greater body is greater than that of a less, the weight of GB
will be greater than that of FB; and thus the weight of the finite
body is greater than that of the infinite. And, further, the weight
of unequal masses will be the same, since the infinite and the finite
cannot be equal. It does not matter whether the weights are commensurable
or not. If (a) they are incommensurable the same reasoning holds.
For instance, suppose E multiplied by three is rather more than C:
the weight of three masses of the full size of BD will be greater
than C. We thus arrive at the same impossibility as before. Again
(b) we may assume weights which are commensurate; for it makes no
difference whether we begin with the weight or with the mass. For
example, assume the weight E to be commensurate with C, and take from
the infinite mass a part BD of weight E. Then let a mass BF be taken
having the same proportion to BD which the two weights have to one
another. (For the mass being infinite you may subtract from it as
much as you please.) These assumed bodies will be commensurate in
mass and in weight alike. Nor again does it make any difference to
our demonstration whether the total mass has its weight equally or
unequally distributed. For it must always be Possible to take from
the infinite mass a body of equal weight to BD by diminishing or increasing
the size of the section to the necessary extent. 

From what we have said, then, it is clear that the weight of the infinite
body cannot be finite. It must then be infinite. We have therefore
only to show this to be impossible in order to prove an infinite body
impossible. But the impossibility of infinite weight can be shown
in the following way. A given weight moves a given distance in a given
time; a weight which is as great and more moves the same distance
in a less time, the times being in inverse proportion to the weights.
For instance, if one weight is twice another, it will take half as
long over a given movement. Further, a finite weight traverses any
finite distance in a finite time. It necessarily follows from this
that infinite weight, if there is such a thing, being, on the one
hand, as great and more than as great as the finite, will move accordingly,
but being, on the other hand, compelled to move in a time inversely
proportionate to its greatness, cannot move at all. The time should
be less in proportion as the weight is greater. But there is no proportion
between the infinite and the finite: proportion can only hold between
a less and a greater finite time. And though you may say that the
time of the movement can be continually diminished, yet there is no
minimum. Nor, if there were, would it help us. For some finite body
could have been found greater than the given finite in the same proportion
which is supposed to hold between the infinite and the given finite;
so that an infinite and a finite weight must have traversed an equal
distance in equal time. But that is impossible. Again, whatever the
time, so long as it is finite, in which the infinite performs the
motion, a finite weight must necessarily move a certain finite distance
in that same time. Infinite weight is therefore impossible, and the
same reasoning applies also to infinite lightness. Bodies then of
infinite weight and of infinite lightness are equally impossible.

That there is no infinite body may be shown, as we have shown it,
by a detailed consideration of the various cases. But it may also
be shown universally, not only by such reasoning as we advanced in
our discussion of principles (though in that passage we have already
determined universally the sense in which the existence of an infinite
is to be asserted or denied), but also suitably to our present purpose
in the following way. That will lead us to a further question. Even
if the total mass is not infinite, it may yet be great enough to admit
a plurality of universes. The question might possibly be raised whether
there is any obstacle to our believing that there are other universes
composed on the pattern of our own, more than one, though stopping
short of infinity. First, however, let us treat of the infinite universally.

Part 7

Every body must necessarily be either finite or infinite, and if infinite,
either of similar or of dissimilar parts. If its parts are dissimilar,
they must represent either a finite or an infinite number of kinds.
That the kinds cannot be infinite is evident, if our original presuppositions
remain unchallenged. For the primary movements being finite in number,
the kinds of simple body are necessarily also finite, since the movement
of a simple body is simple, and the simple movements are finite, and
every natural body must always have its proper motion. Now if the
infinite body is to be composed of a finite number of kinds, then
each of its parts must necessarily be infinite in quantity, that is
to say, the water, fire, &c., which compose it. But this is impossible,
because, as we have already shown, infinite weight and lightness do
not exist. Moreover it would be necessary also that their places should
be infinite in extent, so that the movements too of all these bodies
would be infinite. But this is not possible, if we are to hold to
the truth of our original presuppositions and to the view that neither
that which moves downward, nor, by the same reasoning, that which
moves upward, can prolong its movement to infinity. For it is true
in regard to quality, quantity, and place alike that any process of
change is impossible which can have no end. I mean that if it is impossible
for a thing to have come to be white, or a cubit long, or in Egypt,
it is also impossible for it to be in process of coming to be any
of these. It is thus impossible for a thing to be moving to a place
at which in its motion it can never by any possibility arrive. Again,
suppose the body to exist in dispersion, it may be maintained none
the less that the total of all these scattered particles, say, of
fire, is infinite. But body we saw to be that which has extension
every way. How can there be several dissimilar elements, each infinite?
Each would have to be infinitely extended every way. 

It is no more conceivable, again, that the infinite should exist as
a whole of similar parts. For, in the first place, there is no other
(straight) movement beyond those mentioned: we must therefore give
it one of them. And if so, we shall have to admit either infinite
weight or infinite lightness. Nor, secondly, could the body whose
movement is circular be infinite, since it is impossible for the infinite
to move in a circle. This, indeed, would be as good as saying that
the heavens are infinite, which we have shown to be impossible.

Moreover, in general, it is impossible that the infinite should move
at all. If it did, it would move either naturally or by constraint:
and if by constraint, it possesses also a natural motion, that is
to say, there is another place, infinite like itself, to which it
will move. But that is impossible. 

That in general it is impossible for the infinite to be acted upon
by the finite or to act upon it may be shown as follows.

(1. The infinite cannot be acted upon by the finite.) Let A be an
infinite, B a finite, C the time of a given movement produced by one
in the other. Suppose, then, that A was heated, or impelled, or modified
in any way, or caused to undergo any sort of movement whatever, by
in the time C. Let D be less than B; and, assuming that a lesser agent
moves a lesser patient in an equal time, call the quantity thus modified
by D, E. Then, as D is to B, so is E to some finite quantum. We assume
that the alteration of equal by equal takes equal time, and the alteration
of less by less or of greater by greater takes the same time, if the
quantity of the patient is such as to keep the proportion which obtains
between the agents, greater and less. If so, no movement can be caused
in the infinite by any finite agent in any time whatever. For a less
agent will produce that movement in a less patient in an equal time,
and the proportionate equivalent of that patient will be a finite
quantity, since no proportion holds between finite and infinite.

(2. The infinite cannot act upon the finite.) Nor, again, can the
infinite produce a movement in the finite in any time whatever. Let
A be an infinite, B a finite, C the time of action. In the time C,
D will produce that motion in a patient less than B, say F. Then take
E, bearing the same proportion to D as the whole BF bears to F. E
will produce the motion in BF in the time C. Thus the finite and infinite
effect the same alteration in equal times. But this is impossible;
for the assumption is that the greater effects it in a shorter time.
It will be the same with any time that can be taken, so that there
will no time in which the infinite can effect this movement. And,
as to infinite time, in that nothing can move another or be moved
by it. For such time has no limit, while the action and reaction have.

(3. There is no interaction between infinites.) Nor can infinite be
acted upon in any way by infinite. Let A and B be infinites, CD being
the time of the action A of upon B. Now the whole B was modified in
a certain time, and the part of this infinite, E, cannot be so modified
in the same time, since we assume that a less quantity makes the movement
in a less time. Let E then, when acted upon by A, complete the movement
in the time D. Then, as D is to CD, so is E to some finite part of
B. This part will necessarily be moved by A in the time CD. For we
suppose that the same agent produces a given effect on a greater and
a smaller mass in longer and shorter times, the times and masses varying
proportionately. There is thus no finite time in which infinites can
move one another. Is their time then infinite? No, for infinite time
has no end, but the movement communicated has. 

If therefore every perceptible body possesses the power of acting
or of being acted upon, or both of these, it is impossible that an
infinite body should be perceptible. All bodies, however, that occupy
place are perceptible. There is therefore no infinite body beyond
the heaven. Nor again is there anything of limited extent beyond it.
And so beyond the heaven there is no body at all. For if you suppose
it an object of intelligence, it will be in a place-since place is
what 'within' and 'beyond' denote-and therefore an object of perception.
But nothing that is not in a place is perceptible. 

The question may also be examined in the light of more general considerations
as follows. The infinite, considered as a whole of similar parts,
cannot, on the one hand, move in a circle. For there is no centre
of the infinite, and that which moves in a circle moves about the
centre. Nor again can the infinite move in a straight line. For there
would have to be another place infinite like itself to be the goal
of its natural movement and another, equally great, for the goal of
its unnatural movement. Moreover, whether its rectilinear movement
is natural or constrained, in either case the force which causes its
motion will have to be infinite. For infinite force is force of an
infinite body, and of an infinite body the force is infinite. So the
motive body also will be infinite. (The proof of this is given in
our discussion of movement, where it is shown that no finite thing
possesses infinite power, and no infinite thing finite power.) If
then that which moves naturally can also move unnaturally, there will
be two infinites, one which causes, and another which exhibits the
latter motion. Again, what is it that moves the infinite? If it moves
itself, it must be animate. But how can it possibly be conceived as
an infinite animal? And if there is something else that moves it,
there will be two infinites, that which moves and that which is moved,
differing in their form and power. 

If the whole is not continuous, but exists, as Democritus and Leucippus
think, in the form of parts separated by void, there must necessarily
be one movement of all the multitude. They are distinguished, we are
told, from one another by their figures; but their nature is one,
like many pieces of gold separated from one another. But each piece
must, as we assert, have the same motion. For a single clod moves
to the same place as the whole mass of earth, and a spark to the same
place as the whole mass of fire. So that if it be weight that all
possess, no body is, strictly speaking, light: and if lightness be
universal, none is heavy. Moreover, whatever possesses weight or lightness
will have its place either at one of the extremes or in the middle
region. But this is impossible while the world is conceived as infinite.
And, generally, that which has no centre or extreme limit, no up or
down, gives the bodies no place for their motion; and without that
movement is impossible. A thing must move either naturally or unnaturally,
and the two movements are determined by the proper and alien places.
Again, a place in which a thing rests or to which it moves unnaturally,
must be the natural place for some other body, as experience shows.
Necessarily, therefore, not everything possesses weight or lightness,
but some things do and some do not. From these arguments then it is
clear that the body of the universe is not infinite. 

Part 8

We must now proceed to explain why there cannot be more than one heaven-the
further question mentioned above. For it may be thought that we have
not proved universal of bodies that none whatever can exist outside
our universe, and that our argument applied only to those of indeterminate
extent. 

Now all things rest and move naturally and by constraint. A thing
moves naturally to a place in which it rests without constraint, and
rests naturally in a place to which it moves without constraint. On
the other hand, a thing moves by constraint to a place in which it
rests by constraint, and rests by constraint in a place to which it
moves by constraint. Further, if a given movement is due to constraint,
its contrary is natural. If, then, it is by constraint that earth
moves from a certain place to the centre here, its movement from here
to there will be natural, and if earth from there rests here without
constraint, its movement hither will be natural. And the natural movement
in each case is one. Further, these worlds, being similar in nature
to ours, must all be composed of the same bodies as it. Moreover each
of the bodies, fire, I mean, and earth and their intermediates, must
have the same power as in our world. For if these names are used equivocally,
if the identity of name does not rest upon an identity of form in
these elements and ours, then the whole to which they belong can only
be called a world by equivocation. Clearly, then, one of the bodies
will move naturally away from the centre and another towards the centre,
since fire must be identical with fire, earth with earth, and so on,
as the fragments of each are identical in this world. That this must
be the case is evident from the principles laid down in our discussion
of the movements, for these are limited in number, and the distinction
of the elements depends upon the distinction of the movements. Therefore,
since the movements are the same, the elements must also be the same
everywhere. The particles of earth, then, in another world move naturally
also to our centre and its fire to our circumference. This, however,
is impossible, since, if it were true, earth must, in its own world,
move upwards, and fire to the centre; in the same way the earth of
our world must move naturally away from the centre when it moves towards
the centre of another universe. This follows from the supposed juxtaposition
of the worlds. For either we must refuse to admit the identical nature
of the simple bodies in the various universes, or, admitting this,
we must make the centre and the extremity one as suggested. This being
so, it follows that there cannot be more worlds than one.

To postulate a difference of nature in the simple bodies according
as they are more or less distant from their proper places is unreasonable.
For what difference can it make whether we say that a thing is this
distance away or that? One would have to suppose a difference proportionate
to the distance and increasing with it, but the form is in fact the
same. Moreover, the bodies must have some movement, since the fact
that they move is quite evident. Are we to say then that all their
movements, even those which are mutually contrary, are due to constraint?
No, for a body which has no natural movement at all cannot be moved
by constraint. If then the bodies have a natural movement, the movement
of the particular instances of each form must necessarily have for
goal a place numerically one, i.e. a particular centre or a particular
extremity. If it be suggested that the goal in each case is one in
form but numerically more than one, on the analogy of particulars
which are many though each undifferentiated in form, we reply that
the variety of goal cannot be limited to this portion or that but
must extend to all alike. For all are equally undifferentiated in
form, but any one is different numerically from any other. What I
mean is this: if the portions in this world behave similarly both
to one another and to those in another world, then the portion which
is taken hence will not behave differently either from the portions
in another world or from those in the same world, but similarly to
them, since in form no portion differs from another. The result is
that we must either abandon our present assumption or assert that
the centre and the extremity are each numerically one. But this being
so, the heaven, by the same evidence and the same necessary inferences,
must be one only and no more. 

A consideration of the other kinds of movement also makes it plain
that there is some point to which earth and fire move naturally. For
in general that which is moved changes from something into something,
the starting-point and the goal being different in form, and always
it is a finite change. For instance, to recover health is to change
from disease to health, to increase is to change from smallness to
greatness. Locomotion must be similar: for it also has its goal and
starting-point--and therefore the starting-point and the goal of the
natural movement must differ in form-just as the movement of coming
to health does not take any direction which chance or the wishes of
the mover may select. Thus, too, fire and earth move not to infinity
but to opposite points; and since the opposition in place is between
above and below, these will be the limits of their movement. (Even
in circular movement there is a sort of opposition between the ends
of the diameter, though the movement as a whole has no contrary: so
that here too the movement has in a sense an opposed and finite goal.)
There must therefore be some end to locomotion: it cannot continue
to infinity. 

This conclusion that local movement is not continued to infinity is
corroborated by the fact that earth moves more quickly the nearer
it is to the centre, and fire the nearer it is to the upper place.
But if movement were infinite speed would be infinite also; and if
speed then weight and lightness. For as superior speed in downward
movement implies superior weight, so infinite increase of weight necessitates
infinite increase of speed. 

Further, it is not the action of another body that makes one of these
bodies move up and the other down; nor is it constraint, like the
'extrusion' of some writers. For in that case the larger the mass
of fire or earth the slower would be the upward or downward movement;
but the fact is the reverse: the greater the mass of fire or earth
the quicker always is its movement towards its own place. Again, the
speed of the movement would not increase towards the end if it were
due to constraint or extrusion; for a constrained movement always
diminishes in speed as the source of constraint becomes more distant,
and a body moves without constraint to the place whence it was moved
by constraint. 

A consideration of these points, then, gives adequate assurance of
the truth of our contentions. The same could also be shown with the
aid of the discussions which fall under First Philosophy, as well
as from the nature of the circular movement, which must be eternal
both here and in the other worlds. It is plain, too, from the following
considerations that the universe must be one. 

The bodily elements are three, and therefore the places of the elements
will be three also; the place, first, of the body which sinks to the
bottom, namely the region about the centre; the place, secondly, of
the revolving body, namely the outermost place, and thirdly, the intermediate
place, belonging to the intermediate body. Here in this third place
will be the body which rises to the surface; since, if not here, it
will be elsewhere, and it cannot be elsewhere: for we have two bodies,
one weightless, one endowed with weight, and below is place of the
body endowed with weight, since the region about the centre has been
given to the heavy body. And its position cannot be unnatural to it,
for it would have to be natural to something else, and there is nothing
else. It must then occupy the intermediate place. What distinctions
there are within the intermediate itself we will explain later on.

We have now said enough to make plain the character and number of
the bodily elements, the place of each, and further, in general, how
many in number the various places are. 

Part 9

We must show not only that the heaven is one, but also that more than
one heaven is and, further, that, as exempt from decay and generation,
the heaven is eternal. We may begin by raising a difficulty. From
one point of view it might seem impossible that the heaven should
be one and unique, since in all formations and products whether of
nature or of art we can distinguish the shape in itself and the shape
in combination with matter. For instance the form of the sphere is
one thing and the gold or bronze sphere another; the shape of the
circle again is one thing, the bronze or wooden circle another. For
when we state the essential nature of the sphere or circle we do not
include in the formula gold or bronze, because they do not belong
to the essence, but if we are speaking of the copper or gold sphere
we do include them. We still make the distinction even if we cannot
conceive or apprehend any other example beside the particular thing.
This may, of course, sometimes be the case: it might be, for instance,
that only one circle could be found; yet none the less the difference
will remain between the being of circle and of this particular circle,
the one being form, the other form in matter, i.e. a particular thing.
Now since the universe is perceptible it must be regarded as a particular;
for everything that is perceptible subsists, as we know, in matter.
But if it is a particular, there will be a distinction between the
being of 'this universe' and of 'universe' unqualified. There is a
difference, then, between 'this universe' and simple 'universe'; the
second is form and shape, the first form in combination with matter;
and any shape or form has, or may have, more than one particular instance.

On the supposition of Forms such as some assert, this must be the
case, and equally on the view that no such entity has a separate existence.
For in every case in which the essence is in matter it is a fact of
observation that the particulars of like form are several or infinite
in number. Hence there either are, or may be, more heavens than one.
On these grounds, then, it might be inferred either that there are
or that there might be several heavens. We must, however, return and
ask how much of this argument is correct and how much not.

Now it is quite right to say that the formula of the shape apart from
the matter must be different from that of the shape in the matter,
and we may allow this to be true. We are not, however, therefore compelled
to assert a plurality of worlds. Such a plurality is in fact impossible
if this world contains the entirety of matter, as in fact it does.
But perhaps our contention can be made clearer in this way. Suppose
'aquilinity' to be curvature in the nose or flesh, and flesh to be
the matter of aquilinity. Suppose further, that all flesh came together
into a single whole of flesh endowed with this aquiline quality. Then
neither would there be, nor could there arise, any other thing that
was aquiline. Similarly, suppose flesh and bones to be the matter
of man, and suppose a man to be created of all flesh and all bones
in indissoluble union. The possibility of another man would be removed.
Whatever case you took it would be the same. The general rule is this:
a thing whose essence resides in a substratum of matter can never
come into being in the absence of all matter. Now the universe is
certainly a particular and a material thing: if however, it is composed
not of a part but of the whole of matter, then though the being of
'universe' and of 'this universe' are still distinct, yet there is
no other universe, and no possibility of others being made, because
all the matter is already included in this. It remains, then, only
to prove that it is composed of all natural perceptible body.

First, however, we must explain what we mean by 'heaven' and in how
many senses we use the word, in order to make clearer the object of
our inquiry. (a) In one sense, then, we call 'heaven' the substance
of the extreme circumference of the whole, or that natural body whose
place is at the extreme circumference. We recognize habitually a special
right to the name 'heaven' in the extremity or upper region, which
we take to be the seat of all that is divine. (b) In another sense,
we use this name for the body continuous with the extreme circumference
which contains the moon, the sun, and some of the stars; these we
say are 'in the heaven'. (c) In yet another sense we give the name
to all body included within extreme circumference, since we habitually
call the whole or totality 'the heaven'. The word, then, is used in
three senses. 

Now the whole included within the extreme circumference must be composed
of all physical and sensible body, because there neither is, nor can
come into being, any body outside the heaven. For if there is a natural
body outside the extreme circumference it must be either a simple
or a composite body, and its position must be either natural or unnatural.
But it cannot be any of the simple bodies. For, first, it has been
shown that that which moves in a circle cannot change its place. And,
secondly, it cannot be that which moves from the centre or that which
lies lowest. Naturally they could not be there, since their proper
places are elsewhere; and if these are there unnaturally, the exterior
place will be natural to some other body, since a place which is unnatural
to one body must be natural to another: but we saw that there is no
other body besides these. Then it is not possible that any simple
body should be outside the heaven. But, if no simple body, neither
can any mixed body be there: for the presence of the simple body is
involved in the presence of the mixture. Further neither can any body
come into that place: for it will do so either naturally or unnaturally,
and will be either simple or composite; so that the same argument
will apply, since it makes no difference whether the question is 'does
A exist?' or 'could A come to exist?' From our arguments then it is
evident not only that there is not, but also that there could never
come to be, any bodily mass whatever outside the circumference. The
world as a whole, therefore, includes all its appropriate matter,
which is, as we saw, natural perceptible body. So that neither are
there now, nor have there ever been, nor can there ever be formed
more heavens than one, but this heaven of ours is one and unique and
complete. 

It is therefore evident that there is also no place or void or time
outside the heaven. For in every place body can be present; and void
is said to be that in which the presence of body, though not actual,
is possible; and time is the number of movement. But in the absence
of natural body there is no movement, and outside the heaven, as we
have shown, body neither exists nor can come to exist. It is clear
then that there is neither place, nor void, nor time, outside the
heaven. Hence whatever is there, is of such a nature as not to occupy
any place, nor does time age it; nor is there any change in any of
the things which lie beyond the outermost motion; they continue through
their entire duration unalterable and unmodified, living the best
and most selfsufficient of lives. As a matter of fact, this word 'duration'
possessed a divine significance for the ancients, for the fulfilment
which includes the period of life of any creature, outside of which
no natural development can fall, has been called its duration. On
the same principle the fulfilment of the whole heaven, the fulfilment
which includes all time and infinity, is 'duration'-a name based upon
the fact that it is always-duration immortal and divine. From it derive
the being and life which other things, some more or less articulately
but others feebly, enjoy. So, too, in its discussions concerning the
divine, popular philosophy often propounds the view that whatever
is divine, whatever is primary and supreme, is necessarily unchangeable.
This fact confirms what we have said. For there is nothing else stronger
than it to move it-since that would mean more divine-and it has no
defect and lacks none of its proper excellences. Its unceasing movement,
then, is also reasonable, since everything ceases to move when it
comes to its proper place, but the body whose path is the circle has
one and the same place for starting-point and goal. 

Part 10

Having established these distinctions, we may now proceed to the question
whether the heaven is ungenerated or generated, indestructible or
destructible. Let us start with a review of the theories of other
thinkers; for the proofs of a theory are difficulties for the contrary
theory. Besides, those who have first heard the pleas of our adversaries
will be more likely to credit the assertions which we are going to
make. We shall be less open to the charge of procuring judgement by
default. To give a satisfactory decision as to the truth it is necessary
to be rather an arbitrator than a party to the dispute. 

That the world was generated all are agreed, but, generation over,
some say that it is eternal, others say that it is destructible like
any other natural formation. Others again, with Empedliocles of Acragas
and Heraclitus of Ephesus, believe that there is alternation in the
destructive process, which takes now this direction, now that, and
continues without end. 

Now to assert that it was generated and yet is eternal is to assert
the impossible; for we cannot reasonably attribute to anything any
characteristics but those which observation detects in many or all
instances. But in this case the facts point the other way: generated
things are seen always to be destroyed. Further, a thing whose present
state had no beginning and which could not have been other than it
was at any previous moment throughout its entire duration, cannot
possibly be changed. For there will have to be some cause of change,
and if this had been present earlier it would have made possible another
condition of that to which any other condition was impossible. Suppose
that the world was formed out of elements which were formerly otherwise
conditioned than as they are now. Then (1) if their condition was
always so and could not have been otherwise, the world could never
have come into being. And (2) if the world did come into being, then,
clearly, their condition must have been capable of change and not
eternal: after combination therefore they will be dispersed, just
as in the past after dispersion they came into combination, and this
process either has been, or could have been, indefinitely repeated.
But if this is so, the world cannot be indestructible, and it does
not matter whether the change of condition has actually occurred or
remains a possibility. 

Some of those who hold that the world, though indestructible, was
yet generated, try to support their case by a parallel which is illusory.
They say that in their statements about its generation they are doing
what geometricians do when they construct their figures, not implying
that the universe really had a beginning, but for didactic reasons
facilitating understanding by exhibiting the object, like the figure,
as in course of formation. The two cases, as we said, are not parallel;
for, in the construction of the figure, when the various steps are
completed the required figure forthwith results; but in these other
demonstrations what results is not that which was required. Indeed
it cannot be so; for antecedent and consequent, as assumed, are in
contradiction. The ordered, it is said, arose out of the unordered;
and the same thing cannot be at the same time both ordered and unordered;
there must be a process and a lapse of time separating the two states.
In the figure, on the other hand, there is no temporal separation.
It is clear then that the universe cannot be at once eternal and generated.

To say that the universe alternately combines and dissolves is no
more paradoxical than to make it eternal but varying in shape. It
is as if one were to think that there was now destruction and now
existence when from a child a man is generated, and from a man a child.
For it is clear that when the elements come together the result is
not a chance system and combination, but the very same as before-especially
on the view of those who hold this theory, since they say that the
contrary is the cause of each state. So that if the totality of body,
which is a continuum, is now in this order or disposition and now
in that, and if the combination of the whole is a world or heaven,
then it will not be the world that comes into being and is destroyed,
but only its dispositions. 

If the world is believed to be one, it is impossible to suppose that
it should be, as a whole, first generated and then destroyed, never
to reappear; since before it came into being there was always present
the combination prior to it, and that, we hold, could never change
if it was never generated. If, on the other hand, the worlds are infinite
in number the view is more plausible. But whether this is, or is not,
impossible will be clear from what follows. For there are some who
think it possible both for the ungenerated to be destroyed and for
the generated to persist undestroyed. (This is held in the Timaeus,
where Plato says that the heaven, though it was generated, will none
the less exist to eternity.) So far as the heaven is concerned we
have answered this view with arguments appropriate to the nature of
the heaven: on the general question we shall attain clearness when
we examine the matter universally. 

Part 11

We must first distinguish the senses in which we use the words 'ungenerated'
and 'generated', 'destructible' and 'indestructible'. These have many
meanings, and though it may make no difference to the argument, yet
some confusion of mind must result from treating as uniform in its
use a word which has several distinct applications. The character
which is the ground of the predication will always remain obscure.

The word 'ungenerated' then is used (a) in one sense whenever something
now is which formerly was not, no process of becoming or change being
involved. Such is the case, according to some, with contact and motion,
since there is no process of coming to be in contact or in motion.
(b) It is used in another sense, when something which is capable of
coming to be, with or without process, does not exist; such a thing
is ungenerated in the sense that its generation is not a fact but
a possibility. (c) It is also applied where there is general impossibility
of any generation such that the thing now is which then was not. And
'impossibility' has two uses: first, where it is untrue to say that
the thing can ever come into being, and secondly, where it cannot
do so easily, quickly, or well. In the same way the word 'generated'
is used, (a) first, where what formerly was not afterwards is, whether
a process of becoming was or was not involved, so long as that which
then was not, now is; (b) secondly, of anything capable of existing,
'capable' being defined with reference either to truth or to facility;
(c) thirdly, of anything to which the passage from not being to being
belongs, whether already actual, if its existence is due to a past
process of becoming, or not yet actual but only possible. The uses
of the words 'destructible' and 'indestructible' are similar. 'Destructible'
is applied (a) to that which formerly was and afterwards either is
not or might not be, whether a period of being destroyed and changed
intervenes or not; and (b) sometimes we apply the word to that which
a process of destruction may cause not to be; and also (c) in a third
sense, to that which is easily destructible, to the 'easily destroyed',
so to speak. Of the indestructible the same account holds good. It
is either (a) that which now is and now is not, without any process
of destruction, like contact, which without being destroyed afterwards
is not, though formerly it was; or (b) that which is but might not
be, or which will at some time not be, though it now is. For you exist
now and so does the contact; yet both are destructible, because a
time will come when it will not be true of you that you exist, nor
of these things that they are in contact. Thirdly (c) in its most
proper use, it is that which is, but is incapable of any destruction
such that the thing which now is later ceases to be or might cease
to be; or again, that which has not yet been destroyed, but in the
future may cease to be. For indestructible is also used of that which
is destroyed with difficulty. 

This being so, we must ask what we mean by 'possible' and 'impossible'.
For in its most proper use the predicate 'indestructible' is given
because it is impossible that the thing should be destroyed, i.e.
exist at one time and not at another. And 'ungenerated' also involves
impossibility when used for that which cannot be generated, in such
fashion that, while formerly it was not, later it is. An instance
is a commensurable diagonal. Now when we speak of a power to move
or to lift weights, we refer always to the maximum. We speak, for
instance, of a power to lift a hundred talents or walk a hundred stades-though
a power to effect the maximum is also a power to effect any part of
the maximum-since we feel obliged in defining the power to give the
limit or maximum. A thing, then, which is within it. If, for example,
a man can lift a hundred talents, he can also lift two, and if he
can walk a hundred stades, he can also walk two. But the power is
of the maximum, and a thing said, with reference to its maximum, to
be incapable of so much is also incapable of any greater amount. It
is, for instance, clear that a person who cannot walk a thousand stades
will also be unable to walk a thousand and one. This point need not
trouble us, for we may take it as settled that what is, in the strict
sense, possible is determined by a limiting maximum. Now perhaps the
objection might be raised that there is no necessity in this, since
he who sees a stade need not see the smaller measures contained in
it, while, on the contrary, he who can see a dot or hear a small sound
will perceive what is greater. This, however, does not touch our argument.
The maximum may be determined either in the power or in its object.
The application of this is plain. Superior sight is sight of the smaller
body, but superior speed is that of the greater body. 

Part 12

Having established these distinctions we car now proceed to the sequel.
If there are thing! capable both of being and of not being, there
must be some definite maximum time of their being and not being; a
time, I mean, during which continued existence is possible to them
and a time during which continued nonexistence is possible. And this
is true in every category, whether the thing is, for example, 'man',
or 'white', or 'three cubits long', or whatever it may be. For if
the time is not definite in quantity, but longer than any that can
be suggested and shorter than none, then it will be possible for one
and the same thing to exist for infinite time and not to exist for
another infinity. This, however, is impossible. 

Let us take our start from this point. The impossible and the false
have not the same significance. One use of 'impossible' and 'possible',
and 'false' and 'true', is hypothetical. It is impossible, for instance,
on a certain hypothesis that the triangle should have its angles equal
to two right angles, and on another the diagonal is commensurable.
But there are also things possible and impossible, false and true,
absolutely. Now it is one thing to be absolutely false, and another
thing to be absolutely impossible. To say that you are standing when
you are not standing is to assert a falsehood, but not an impossibility.
Similarly to say that a man who is playing the harp, but not singing,
is singing, is to say what is false but not impossible. To say, however,
that you are at once standing and sitting, or that the diagonal is
commensurable, is to say what is not only false but also impossible.
Thus it is not the same thing to make a false and to make an impossible
hypothesis, and from the impossible hypothesis impossible results
follow. A man has, it is true, the capacity at once of sitting and
of standing, because when he possesses the one he also possesses the
other; but it does not follow that he can at once sit and stand, only
that at another time he can do the other also. But if a thing has
for infinite time more than one capacity, another time is impossible
and the times must coincide. Thus if a thing which exists for infinite
time is destructible, it will have the capacity of not being. Now
if it exists for infinite time let this capacity be actualized; and
it will be in actuality at once existent and non-existent. Thus a
false conclusion would follow because a false assumption was made,
but if what was assumed had not been impossible its consequence would
not have been impossible. 

Anything then which always exists is absolutely imperishable. It is
also ungenerated, since if it was generated it will have the power
for some time of not being. For as that which formerly was, but now
is not, or is capable at some future time of not being, is destructible,
so that which is capable of formerly not having been is generated.
But in the case of that which always is, there is no time for such
a capacity of not being, whether the supposed time is finite or infinite;
for its capacity of being must include the finite time since it covers
infinite time. 

It is therefore impossible that one and the same thing should be capable
of always existing and of always not-existing. And 'not always existing',
the contradictory, is also excluded. Thus it is impossible for a thing
always to exist and yet to be destructible. Nor, similarly, can it
be generated. For of two attributes if B cannot be present without
A, the impossibility A of proves the impossibility of B. What always
is, then, since it is incapable of ever not being, cannot possibly
be generated. But since the contradictory of 'that which is always
capable of being' 'that which is not always capable of being'; while
'that which is always capable of not being' is the contrary, whose
contradictory in turn is 'that which is not always capable of not
being', it is necessary that the contradictories of both terms should
be predicable of one and the same thing, and thus that, intermediate
between what always is and what always is not, there should be that
to which being and not-being are both possible; for the contradictory
of each will at times be true of it unless it always exists. Hence
that which not always is not will sometimes be and sometimes not be;
and it is clear that this is true also of that which cannot always
be but sometimes is and therefore sometimes is not. One thing, then,
will have the power of being, and will thus be intermediate between
the other two. 

Expresed universally our argument is as follows. Let there be two
attributes, A and B, not capable of being present in any one thing
together, while either A or C and either B or D are capable of being
present in everything. Then C and D must be predicated of everything
of which neither A nor B is predicated. Let E lie between A and B;
for that which is neither of two contraries is a mean between them.
In E both C and D must be present, for either A or C is present everywhere
and therefore in E. Since then A is impossible, C must be present,
and the same argument holds of D. 

Neither that which always is, therefore, nor that which always is
not is either generated or destructible. And clearly whatever is generated
or destructible is not eternal. If it were, it would be at once capable
of always being and capable of not always being, but it has already
been shown that this is impossible. Surely then whatever is ungenerated
and in being must be eternal, and whatever is indestructible and in
being must equally be so. (I use the words 'ungenerated' and 'indestructible'
in their proper sense, 'ungenerated' for that which now is and could
not at any previous time have been truly said not to be; 'indestructible'
for that which now is and cannot at any future time be truly said
not to be.) If, again, the two terms are coincident, if the ungenerated
is indestructible, and the indestructible ungenearted, then each of
them is coincident with 'eternal'; anything ungenerated is eternal
and anything indestructible is eternal. This is clear too from the
definition of the terms, Whatever is destructible must be generated;
for it is either ungenerated, or generated, but, if ungenerated, it
is by hypothesis indestructible. Whatever, further, is generated must
be destructible. For it is either destructible or indestructible,
but, if indestructible, it is by hypothesis ungenerated.

If, however, 'indestructible' and 'ungenerated' are not coincident,
there is no necessity that either the ungenerated or the indestructible
should be eternal. But they must be coincident, for the following
reasons. The terms 'generated' and 'destructible' are coincident;
this is obvious from our former remarks, since between what always
is and what always is not there is an intermediate which is neither,
and that intermediate is the generated and destructible. For whatever
is either of these is capable both of being and of not being for a
definite time: in either case, I mean, there is a certain period of
time during which the thing is and another during which it is not.
Anything therefore which is generated or destructible must be intermediate.
Now let A be that which always is and B that which always is not,
C the generated, and D the destructible. Then C must be intermediate
between A and B. For in their case there is no time in the direction
of either limit, in which either A is not or B is. But for the generated
there must be such a time either actually or potentially, though not
for A and B in either way. C then will be, and also not be, for a
limited length of time, and this is true also of D, the destructible.
Therefore each is both generated and destructible. Therefore 'generated'
and 'destructible' are coincident. Now let E stand for the ungenerated,
F for the generated, G for the indestructible, and H for the destructible.
As for F and H, it has been shown that they are coincident. But when
terms stand to one another as these do, F and H coincident, E and
F never predicated of the same thing but one or other of everything,
and G and H likewise, then E and G must needs be coincident. For suppose
that E is not coincident with G, then F will be, since either E or
F is predictable of everything. But of that of which F is predicated
H will be predicable also. H will then be coincident with G, but this
we saw to be impossible. And the same argument shows that G is coincident
with E. 

Now the relation of the ungenerated (E) to the generated (F) is the
same as that of the indestructible (G) to the destructible (H). To
say then that there is no reason why anything should not be generated
and yet indestructible or ungenerated and yet destroyed, to imagine
that in the one case generation and in the other case destruction
occurs once for all, is to destroy part of the data. For (1) everything
is capable of acting or being acted upon, of being or not being, either
for an infinite, or for a definitely limited space of time; and the
infinite time is only a possible alternative because it is after a
fashion defined, as a length of time which cannot be exceeded. But
infinity in one direction is neither infinite or finite. (2) Further,
why, after always existing, was the thing destroyed, why, after an
infinity of not being, was it generated, at one moment rather than
another? If every moment is alike and the moments are infinite in
number, it is clear that a generated or destructible thing existed
for an infinite time. It has therefore for an infinite time the capacity
of not being (since the capacity of being and the capacity of not
being will be present together), if destructible, in the time before
destruction, if generated, in the time after generation. If then we
assume the two capacities to be actualized, opposites will be present
together. (3) Further, this second capacity will be present like the
first at every moment, so that the thing will have for an infinite
time the capacity both of being and of not being; but this has been
shown to be impossible. (4) Again, if the capacity is present prior
to the activity, it will be present for all time, even while the thing
was as yet ungenerated and non-existent, throughout the infinite time
in which it was capable of being generated. At that time, then, when
it was not, at that same time it had the capacity of being, both of
being then and of being thereafter, and therefore for an infinity
of time. 

It is clear also on other grounds that it is impossible that the destructible
should not at some time be destroyed. For otherwise it will always
be at once destructible and in actuality indestructible, so that it
will be at the same time capable of always existing and of not always
existing. Thus the destructible is at some time actually destroyed.
The generable, similarly, has been generated, for it is capable of
having been generated and thus also of not always existing.

We may also see in the following way how impossible it is either for
a thing which is generated to be thenceforward indestructible, or
for a thing which is ungenerated and has always hitherto existed to
be destroyed. Nothing that is by chance can be indestructible or ungenerated,
since the products of chance and fortune are opposed to what is, or
comes to be, always or usually, while anything which exists for a
time infinite either absolutely or in one direction, is in existence
either always or usually. That which is by chance, then, is by nature
such as to exist at one time and not at another. But in things of
that character the contradictory states proceed from one and the same
capacity, the matter of the thing being the cause equally of its existence
and of its non-existence. Hence contradictories would be present together
in actuality. 

Further, it cannot truly be said of a thing now that it exists last
year, nor could it be said last year that it exists now. It is therefore
impossible for what once did not exist later to be eternal. For in
its later state it will possess the capacity of not existing, only
not of not existing at a time when it exists-since then it exists
in actuality-but of not existing last year or in the past. Now suppose
it to be in actuality what it is capable of being. It will then be
true to say now that it does not exist last year. But this is impossible.
No capacity relates to being in the past, but always to being in the
present or future. It is the same with the notion of an eternity of
existence followed later by non-existence. In the later state the
capacity will be present for that which is not there in actuality.
Actualize, then, the capacity. It will be true to say now that this
exists last year or in the past generally. 

Considerations also not general like these but proper to the subject
show it to be impossible that what was formerly eternal should later
be destroyed or that what formerly was not should later be eternal.
Whatever is destructible or generated is always alterable. Now alteration
is due to contraries, and the things which compose the natural body
are the very same that destroy it. 



BOOK II

Part 1 

That the heaven as a whole neither came into being nor admits of
destruction, as some assert, but is one and eternal, with no end or
beginning of its total duration, containing and embracing in itself
the infinity of time, we may convince ourselves not only by the arguments
already set forth but also by a consideration of the views of those
who differ from us in providing for its generation. If our view is
a possible one, and the manner of generation which they assert is
impossible, this fact will have great weight in convincing us of the
immortality and eternity of the world. Hence it is well to persuade
oneself of the truth of the ancient and truly traditional theories,
that there is some immortal and divine thing which possesses movement,
but movement such as has no limit and is rather itself the limit of
all other movement. A limit is a thing which contains; and this motion,
being perfect, contains those imperfect motions which have a limit
and a goal, having itself no beginning or end, but unceasing through
the infinity of time, and of other movements, to some the cause of
their beginning, to others offering the goal. The ancients gave to
the Gods the heaven or upper place, as being alone immortal; and our
present argument testifies that it is indestructible and ungenerated.
Further, it is unaffected by any mortal discomfort, and, in addition,
effortless; for it needs no constraining necessity to keep it to its
path, and prevent it from moving with some other movement more natural
to itself. Such a constrained movement would necessarily involve effort
the more so, the more eternal it were-and would be inconsistent with
perfection. Hence we must not believe the old tale which says that
the world needs some Atlas to keep it safe-a tale composed, it would
seem, by men who, like later thinkers, conceived of all the upper
bodies as earthy and endowed with weight, and therefore supported
it in their fabulous way upon animate necessity. We must no more believe
that than follow Empedocles when he says that the world, by being
whirled round, received a movement quick enough to overpower its own
downward tendency, and thus has been kept from destruction all this
time. Nor, again, is it conceivable that it should persist eternally
by the necessitation of a soul. For a soul could not live in such
conditions painlessly or happily, since the movement involves constraint,
being imposed on the first body, whose natural motion is different,
and imposed continuously. It must therefore be uneasy and devoid of
all rational satisfaction; for it could not even, like the soul of
mortal animals, take recreation in the bodily relaxation of sleep.
An Ixion's lot must needs possess it, without end or respite. If then,
as we said, the view already stated of the first motion is a possible
one, it is not only more appropriate so to conceive of its eternity,
but also on this hypothesis alone are we able to advance a theory
consistent with popular divinations of the divine nature. But of this
enough for the present. 

Part 2

Since there are some who say that there is a right and a left in the
heaven, with those who are known as Pythagoreans-to whom indeed the
view really belongs-we must consider whether, if we are to apply these
principles to the body of the universe, we should follow their statement
of the matter or find a better way. At the start we may say that,
if right and left are applicable, there are prior principles which
must first be applied. These principles have been analysed in the
discussion of the movements of animals, for the reason that they are
proper to animal nature. For in some animals we find all such distinctions
of parts as this of right and left clearly present, and in others
some; but in plants we find only above and below. Now if we are to
apply to the heaven such a distinction of parts, we must exect, as
we have said, to find in it also the distinction which in animals
is found first of them all. The distinctions are three, namely, above
and below, front and its opposite, right and left-all these three
oppositions we expect to find in the perfect body-and each may be
called a principle. Above is the principle of length, right of breadth,
front of depth. Or again we may connect them with the various movements,
taking principle to mean that part, in a thing capable of movement,
from which movement first begins. Growth starts from above, locomotion
from the right, sensemovement from in front (for front is simply the
part to which the senses are directed). Hence we must not look for
above and below, right and left, front and back, in every kind of
body, but only in those which, being animate, have a principle of
movement within themselves. For in no inanimate thing do we observe
a part from which movement originates. Some do not move at all, some
move, but not indifferently in any direction; fire, for example, only
upward, and earth only to the centre. It is true that we speak of
above and below, right and left, in these bodies relatively to ourselves.
The reference may be to our own right hands, as with the diviner,
or to some similarity to our own members, such as the parts of a statue
possess; or we may take the contrary spatial order, calling right
that which is to our left, and left that which is to our right. We
observe, however, in the things themselves none of these distinctions;
indeed if they are turned round we proceed to speak of the opposite
parts as right and left, a boy land below, front and back. Hence it
is remarkable that the Pythagoreans should have spoken of these two
principles, right and left, only, to the exclusion of the other four,
which have as good a title as they. There is no less difference between
above and below or front and back in animals generally than between
right and left. The difference is sometimes only one of function,
sometimes also one of shape; and while the distinction of above and
below is characteristic of all animate things, whether plants or animals,
that of right and left is not found in plants. Further, inasmuch as
length is prior to breadth, if above is the principle of length, right
of breadth, and if the principle of that which is prior is itself
prior, then above will be prior to right, or let us say, since 'prior'
is ambiguous, prior in order of generation. If, in addition, above
is the region from which movement originates, right the region in
which it starts, front the region to which it is directed, then on
this ground too above has a certain original character as compared
with the other forms of position. On these two grounds, then, they
may fairly be criticized, first, for omitting the more fundamental
principles, and secondly, for thinking that the two they mentioned
were attributable equally to everything. 

Since we have already determined that functions of this kind belong
to things which possess, a principle of movement, and that the heaven
is animate and possesses a principle of movement, clearly the heaven
must also exhibit above and below, right and left. We need not be
troubled by the question, arising from the spherical shape of the
world, how there can be a distinction of right and left within it,
all parts being alike and all for ever in motion. We must think of
the world as of something in which right differs from left in shape
as well as in other respects, which subsequently is included in a
sphere. The difference of function will persist, but will appear not
to by reason of the regularity of shape. In the same fashion must
we conceive of the beginning of its movement. For even if it never
began to move, yet it must possess a principle from which it would
have begun to move if it had begun, and from which it would begin
again if it came to a stand. Now by its length I mean the interval
between its poles, one pole being above and the other below; for two
hemispheres are specially distinguished from all others by the immobility
of the poles. Further, by 'transverse' in the universe we commonly
mean, not above and below, but a direction crossing the line of the
poles, which, by implication, is length: for transverse motion is
motion crossing motion up and down. Of the poles, that which we see
above us is the lower region, and that which we do not see is the
upper. For right in anything is, as we say, the region in which locomotion
originates, and the rotation of the heaven originates in the region
from which the stars rise. So this will be the right, and the region
where they set the left. If then they begin from the right and move
round to the right, the upper must be the unseen pole. For if it is
the pole we see, the movement will be leftward, which we deny to be
the fact. Clearly then the invisible pole is above. And those who
live in the other hemisphere are above and to the right, while we
are below and to the left. This is just the opposite of the view of
the Pythagoreans, who make us above and on the right side and those
in the other hemisphere below and on the left side; the fact being
the exact opposite. Relatively, however, to the secondary revolution,
I mean that of the planets, we are above and on the right and they
are below and on the left. For the principle of their movement has
the reverse position, since the movement itself is the contrary of
the other: hence it follows that we are at its beginning and they
at its end. Here we may end our discussion of the distinctions of
parts created by the three dimensions and of the consequent differences
of position. 

Part 3

Since circular motion is not the contrary of the reverse circular
motion, we must consider why there is more than one motion, though
we have to pursue our inquiries at a distance-a distance created not
so much by our spatial position as by the fact that our senses enable
us to perceive very few of the attributes of the heavenly bodies.
But let not that deter us. The reason must be sought in the following
facts. Everything which has a function exists for its function. The
activity of God is immortality, i.e. eternal life. Therefore the movement
of that which is divine must be eternal. But such is the heaven, viz.
a divine body, and for that reason to it is given the circular body
whose nature it is to move always in a circle. Why, then, is not the
whole body of the heaven of the same character as that part? Because
there must be something at rest at the centre of the revolving body;
and of that body no part can be at rest, either elsewhere or at the
centre. It could do so only if the body's natural movement were towards
the centre. But the circular movement is natural, since otherwise
it could not be eternal: for nothing unnatural is eternal. The unnatural
is subsequent to the natural, being a derangement of the natural which
occurs in the course of its generation. Earth then has to exist; for
it is earth which is at rest at the centre. (At present we may take
this for granted: it shall be explained later.) But if earth must
exist, so must fire. For, if one of a pair of contraries naturally
exists, the other, if it is really contrary, exists also naturally.
In some form it must be present, since the matter of contraries is
the same. Also, the positive is prior to its privation (warm, for
instance, to cold), and rest and heaviness stand for the privation
of lightness and movement. But further, if fire and earth exist, the
intermediate bodies must exist also: each element stands in a contrary
relation to every other. (This, again, we will here take for granted
and try later to explain.) these four elements generation clearly
is involved, since none of them can be eternal: for contraries interact
with one another and destroy one another. Further, it is inconceivable
that a movable body should be eternal, if its movement cannot be regarded
as naturally eternal: and these bodies we know to possess movement.
Thus we see that generation is necessarily involved. But if so, there
must be at least one other circular motion: for a single movement
of the whole heaven would necessitate an identical relation of the
elements of bodies to one another. This matter also shall be cleared
up in what follows: but for the present so much is clear, that the
reason why there is more than one circular body is the necessity of
generation, which follows on the presence of fire, which, with that
of the other bodies, follows on that of earth; and earth is required
because eternal movement in one body necessitates eternal rest in
another. 

Part 4

The shape of the heaven is of necessity spherical; for that is the
shape most appropriate to its substance and also by nature primary.

First, let us consider generally which shape is primary among planes
and solids alike. Every plane figure must be either rectilinear or
curvilinear. Now the rectilinear is bounded by more than one line,
the curvilinear by one only. But since in any kind the one is naturally
prior to the many and the simple to the complex, the circle will be
the first of plane figures. Again, if by complete, as previously defined,
we mean a thing outside which no part of itself can be found, and
if addition is always possible to the straight line but never to the
circular, clearly the line which embraces the circle is complete.
If then the complete is prior to the incomplete, it follows on this
ground also that the circle is primary among figures. And the sphere
holds the same position among solids. For it alone is embraced by
a single surface, while rectilinear solids have several. The sphere
is among solids what the circle is among plane figures. Further, those
who divide bodies into planes and generate them out of planes seem
to bear witness to the truth of this. Alone among solids they leave
the sphere undivided, as not possessing more than one surface: for
the division into surfaces is not just dividing a whole by cutting
it into its parts, but division of another fashion into parts different
in form. It is clear, then, that the sphere is first of solid figures.

If, again, one orders figures according to their numbers, it is most
natural to arrange them in this way. The circle corresponds to the
number one, the triangle, being the sum of two right angles, to the
number two. But if one is assigned to the triangle, the circle will
not be a figure at all. 

Now the first figure belongs to the first body, and the first body
is that at the farthest circumference. It follows that the body which
revolves with a circular movement must be spherical. The same then
will be true of the body continuous with it: for that which is continuous
with the spherical is spherical. The same again holds of the bodies
between these and the centre. Bodies which are bounded by the spherical
and in contact with it must be, as wholes, spherical; and the bodies
below the sphere of the planets are contiguous with the sphere above
them. The sphere then will be spherical throughout; for every body
within it is contiguous and continuous with spheres. 

Again, since the whole revolves, palpably and by assumption, in a
circle, and since it has been shown that outside the farthest circumference
there is neither void nor place, from these grounds also it will follow
necessarily that the heaven is spherical. For if it is to be rectilinear
in shape, it will follow that there is place and body and void without
it. For a rectilinear figure as it revolves never continues in the
same room, but where formerly was body, is now none, and where now
is none, body will be in a moment because of the projection at the
corners. Similarly, if the world had some other figure with unequal
radii, if, for instance, it were lentiform, or oviform, in every case
we should have to admit space and void outside the moving body, because
the whole body would not always occupy the same room. 

Again, if the motion of the heaven is the measure of all movements
whatever in virtue of being alone continuous and regular and eternal,
and if, in each kind, the measure is the minimum, and the minimum
movement is the swiftest, then, clearly, the movement of the heaven
must be the swiftest of all movements. Now of lines which return upon
themselves the line which bounds the circle is the shortest; and that
movement is the swiftest which follows the shortest line. Therefore,
if the heaven moves in a circle and moves more swiftly than anything
else, it must necessarily be spherical. 

Corroborative evidence may be drawn from the bodies whose position
is about the centre. If earth is enclosed by water, water by air,
air by fire, and these similarly by the upper bodies-which while not
continuous are yet contiguous with them-and if the surface of water
is spherical, and that which is continuous with or embraces the spherical
must itself be spherical, then on these grounds also it is clear that
the heavens are spherical. But the surface of water is seen to be
spherical if we take as our starting-point the fact that water naturally
tends to collect in a hollow place-'hollow' meaning 'nearer the centre'.
Draw from the centre the lines AB, AC, and let their extremities be
joined by the straight line BC. The line AD, drawn to the base of
the triangle, will be shorter than either of the radii. Therefore
the place in which it terminates will be a hollow place. The water
then will collect there until equality is established, that is until
the line AE is equal to the two radii. Thus water forces its way to
the ends of the radii, and there only will it rest: but the line which
connects the extremities of the radii is circular: therefore the surface
of the water BEC is spherical. 

It is plain from the foregoing that the universe is spherical. It
is plain, further, that it is turned (so to speak) with a finish which
no manufactured thing nor anything else within the range of our observation
can even approach. For the matter of which these are composed does
not admit of anything like the same regularity and finish as the substance
of the enveloping body; since with each step away from earth the matter
manifestly becomes finer in the same proportion as water is finer
than earth. 

Part 5

Now there are two ways of moving along a circle, from A to B or from
A to C, and we have already explained that these movements are not
contrary to one another. But nothing which concerns the eternal can
be a matter of chance or spontaneity, and the heaven and its circular
motion are eternal. We must therefore ask why this motion takes one
direction and not the other. Either this is itself an ultimate fact
or there is an ultimate fact behind it. It may seem evidence of excessive
folly or excessive zeal to try to provide an explanation of some things,
or of everything, admitting no exception. The criticism, however,
is not always just: one should first consider what reason there is
for speaking, and also what kind of certainty is looked for, whether
human merely or of a more cogent kind. When any one shall succeed
in finding proofs of greater precision, gratitude will be due to him
for the discovery, but at present we must be content with a probable
solution. If nature always follows the best course possible, and,
just as upward movement is the superior form of rectilinear movement,
since the upper region is more divine than the lower, so forward movement
is superior to backward, then front and back exhibits, like right
and left, as we said before and as the difficulty just stated itself
suggests, the distinction of prior and posterior, which provides a
reason and so solves our difficulty. Supposing that nature is ordered
in the best way possible, this may stand as the reason of the fact
mentioned. For it is best to move with a movement simple and unceasing,
and, further, in the superior of two possible directions.

Part 6

We have next to show that the movement of the heaven is regular and
not irregular. This applies only to the first heaven and the first
movement; for the lower spheres exhibit a composition of several movements
into one. If the movement is uneven, clearly there will be acceleration,
maximum speed, and retardation, since these appear in all irregular
motions. The maximum may occur either at the starting-point or at
the goal or between the two; and we expect natural motion to reach
its maximum at the goal, unnatural motion at the starting-point, and
missiles midway between the two. But circular movement, having no
beginning or limit or middle in the direct sense of the words, has
neither whence nor whither nor middle: for in time it is eternal,
and in length it returns upon itself without a break. If then its
movement has no maximum, it can have no irregularity, since irregularity
is produced by retardation and acceleration. Further, since everything
that is moved is moved by something, the cause of the irregularity
of movement must lie either in the mover or in the moved or both.
For if the mover moved not always with the same force, or if the moved
were altered and did not remain the same, or if both were to change,
the result might well be an irregular movement in the moved. But none
of these possibilities can be conceived as actual in the case of the
heavens. As to that which is moved, we have shown that it is primary
and simple and ungenerated and indestructible and generally unchanging;
and the mover has an even better right to these attributes. It is
the primary that moves the primary, the simple the simple, the indestructible
and ungenerated that which is indestructible and ungenerated. Since
then that which is moved, being a body, is nevertheless unchanging,
how should the mover, which is incorporeal, be changed? 

It follows then, further, that the motion cannot be irregular. For
if irregularity occurs, there must be change either in the movement
as a whole, from fast to slow and slow to fast, or in its parts. That
there is no irregularity in the parts is obvious, since, if there
were, some divergence of the stars would have taken place before now
in the infinity of time, as one moved slower and another faster: but
no alteration of their intervals is ever observed. Nor again is a
change in the movement as a whole admissible. Retardation is always
due to incapacity, and incapacity is unnatural. The incapacities of
animals, age, decay, and the like, are all unnatural, due, it seems,
to the fact that the whole animal complex is made up of materials
which differ in respect of their proper places, and no single part
occupies its own place. If therefore that which is primary contains
nothing unnatural, being simple and unmixed and in its proper place
and having no contrary, then it has no place for incapacity, nor,
consequently, for retardation or (since acceleration involves retardation)
for acceleration. Again, it is inconceivable that the mover should
first show incapacity for an infinite time, and capacity afterwards
for another infinity. For clearly nothing which, like incapacity,
unnatural ever continues for an infinity of time; nor does the unnatural
endure as long as the natural, or any form of incapacity as long as
the capacity. But if the movement is retarded it must necessarily
be retarded for an infinite time. Equally impossible is perpetual
acceleration or perpetual retardation. For such movement would be
infinite and indefinite, but every movement, in our view, proceeds
from one point to another and is definite in character. Again, suppose
one assumes a minimum time in less than which the heaven could not
complete its movement. For, as a given walk or a given exercise on
the harp cannot take any and every time, but every performance has
its definite minimum time which is unsurpassable, so, one might suppose,
the movement of the heaven could not be completed in any and every
time. But in that case perpetual acceleration is impossible (and,
equally, perpetual retardation: for the argument holds of both and
each), if we may take acceleration to proceed by identical or increasing
additions of speed and for an infinite time. The remaining alternative
is to say that the movement exhibits an alternation of slower and
faster: but this is a mere fiction and quite inconceivable. Further,
irregularity of this kind would be particularly unlikely to pass unobserved,
since contrast makes observation easy. 

That there is one heaven, then, only, and that it is ungenerated and
eternal, and further that its movement is regular, has now been sufficiently
explained. 

Part 7

We have next to speak of the stars, as they are called, of their composition,
shape, and movements. It would be most natural and consequent upon
what has been said that each of the stars should be composed of that
substance in which their path lies, since, as we said, there is an
element whose natural movement is circular. In so saying we are only
following the same line of thought as those who say that the stars
are fiery because they believe the upper body to be fire, the presumption
being that a thing is composed of the same stuff as that in which
it is situated. The warmth and light which proceed from them are caused
by the friction set up in the air by their motion. Movement tends
to create fire in wood, stone, and iron; and with even more reason
should it have that effect on air, a substance which is closer to
fire than these. An example is that of missiles, which as they move
are themselves fired so strongly that leaden balls are melted; and
if they are fired the surrounding air must be similarly affected.
Now while the missiles are heated by reason of their motion in air,
which is turned into fire by the agitation produced by their movement,
the upper bodies are carried on a moving sphere, so that, though they
are not themselves fired, yet the air underneath the sphere of the
revolving body is necessarily heated by its motion, and particularly
in that part where the sun is attached to it. Hence warmth increases
as the sun gets nearer or higher or overhead. Of the fact, then, that
the stars are neither fiery nor move in fire, enough has been said.

Part 8

Since changes evidently occur not only in the position of the stars
but also in that of the whole heaven, there are three possibilities.
Either (1) both are at rest, or (2) both are in motion, or (3) the
one is at rest and the other in motion. 

(1) That both should be at rest is impossible; for, if the earth is
at rest, the hypothesis does not account for the observations; and
we take it as granted that the earth is at rest. It remains either
that both are moved, or that the one is moved and the other at rest.

(2) On the view, first, that both are in motion, we have the absurdity
that the stars and the circles move with the same speed, i.e. that
the ace of every star is that of the circle in it moves. For star
and circle are seen to come back to the same place at the same moment;
from which it follows that the star has traversed the circle and the
circle has completed its own movement, i.e. traversed its own circumference,
at one and the same moment. But it is difficult to conceive that the
pace of each star should be exactly proportioned to the size of its
circle. That the pace of each circle should be proportionate to its
size is not absurd but inevitable: but that the same should be true
of the movement of the stars contained in the circles is quite incredible.
For if, on the one and, we suppose that the star which moves on the
greater circle is necessarily swifter, clearly we also admit that
if stars shifted their position so as to exchange circles, the slower
would become swifter and the swifter slower. But this would show that
their movement was not their own, but due to the circles. If, on the
other hand, the arrangement was a chance combination, the coincidence
in every case of a greater circle with a swifter movement of the star
contained in it is too much to believe. In one or two cases it might
not inconceivably fall out so, but to imagine it in every case alike
is a mere fiction. Besides, chance has no place in that which is natural,
and what happens everywhere and in every case is no matter of chance.

(3) The same absurdity is equally plain if it is supposed that the
circles stand still and that it is the stars themselves which move.
For it will follow that the outer stars are the swifter, and that
the pace of the stars corresponds to the size of their circles.

Since, then, we cannot reasonably suppose either that both are in
motion or that the star alone moves, the remaining alternative is
that the circles should move, while the stars are at rest and move
with the circles to which they are attached. Only on this supposition
are we involved in no absurd consequence. For, in the first place,
the quicker movement of the larger circle is natural when all the
circles are attached to the same centre. Whenever bodies are moving
with their proper motion, the larger moves quicker. It is the same
here with the revolving bodies: for the are intercepted by two radii
will be larger in the larger circle, and hence it is not surprising
that the revolution of the larger circle should take the same time
as that of the smaller. And secondly, the fact that the heavens do
not break in pieces follows not only from this but also from the proof
already given of the continuity of the whole. 

Again, since the stars are spherical, as our opponents assert and
we may consistently admit, inasmuch as we construct them out of the
spherical body, and since the spherical body has two movements proper
to itself, namely rolling and spinning, it follows that if the stars
have a movement of their own, it will be one of these. But neither
is observed. (1) Suppose them to spin. They would then stay where
they were, and not change their place, as, by observation and general
consent, they do. Further, one would expect them all to exhibit the
same movement: but the only star which appears to possess this movement
is the sun, at sunrise or sunset, and this appearance is due not to
the sun itself but to the distance from which we observe it. The visual
ray being excessively prolonged becomes weak and wavering. The same
reason probably accounts for the apparent twinkling of the fixed stars
and the absence of twinkling in the planets. The planets are near,
so that the visual ray reaches them in its full vigour, but when it
comes to the fixed stars it is quivering because of the distance and
its excessive extension; and its tremor produces an appearance of
movement in the star: for it makes no difference whether movement
is set up in the ray or in the object of vision. 

(2) On the other hand, it is also clear that the stars do not roll.
For rolling involves rotation: but the 'face', as it is called, of
the moon is always seen. Therefore, since any movement of their own
which the stars possessed would presumably be one proper to themselves,
and no such movement is observed in them, clearly they have no movement
of their own. 

There is, further, the absurdity that nature has bestowed upon them
no organ appropriate to such movement. For nature leaves nothing to
chance, and would not, while caring for animals, overlook things so
precious. Indeed, nature seems deliberately to have stripped them
of everything which makes selforiginated progression possible, and
to have removed them as far as possible from things which have organs
of movement. This is just why it seems proper that the whole heaven
and every star should be spherical. For while of all shapes the sphere
is the most convenient for movement in one place, making possible,
as it does, the swiftest and most selfcontained motion, for forward
movement it is the most unsuitable, least of all resembling shapes
which are self-moved, in that it has no dependent or projecting part,
as a rectilinear figure has, and is in fact as far as possible removed
in shape from ambulatory bodies. Since, therefore, the heavens have
to move in one lace, and the stars are not required to move themselves
forward, it is natural that both should be spherical-a shape which
best suits the movement of the one and the immobility of the other.

Part 9

From all this it is clear that the theory that the movement of the
stars produces a harmony, i.e. that the sounds they make are concordant,
in spite of the grace and originality with which it has been stated,
is nevertheless untrue. Some thinkers suppose that the motion of bodies
of that size must produce a noise, since on our earth the motion of
bodies far inferior in size and in speed of movement has that effect.
Also, when the sun and the moon, they say, and all the stars, so great
in number and in size, are moving with so rapid a motion, how should
they not produce a sound immensely great? Starting from this argument
and from the observation that their speeds, as measured by their distances,
are in the same ratios as musical concordances, they assert that the
sound given forth by the circular movement of the stars is a harmony.
Since, however, it appears unaccountable that we should not hear this
music, they explain this by saying that the sound is in our ears from
the very moment of birth and is thus indistinguishable from its contrary
silence, since sound and silence are discriminated by mutual contrast.
What happens to men, then, is just what happens to coppersmiths, who
are so accustomed to the noise of the smithy that it makes no difference
to them. But, as we said before, melodious and poetical as the theory
is, it cannot be a true account of the facts. There is not only the
absurdity of our hearing nothing, the ground of which they try to
remove, but also the fact that no effect other than sensitive is produced
upon us. Excessive noises, we know, shatter the solid bodies even
of inanimate things: the noise of thunder, for instance, splits rocks
and the strongest of bodies. But if the moving bodies are so great,
and the sound which penetrates to us is proportionate to their size,
that sound must needs reach us in an intensity many times that of
thunder, and the force of its action must be immense. Indeed the reason
why we do not hear, and show in our bodies none of the effects of
violent force, is easily given: it is that there is no noise. But
not only is the explanation evident; it is also a corroboration of
the truth of the views we have advanced. For the very difficulty which
made the Pythagoreans say that the motion of the stars produces a
concord corroborates our view. Bodies which are themselves in motion,
produce noise and friction: but those which are attached or fixed
to a moving body, as the parts to a ship, can no more create noise,
than a ship on a river moving with the stream. Yet by the same argument
one might say it was absurd that on a large vessel the motion of mast
and poop should not make a great noise, and the like might be said
of the movement of the vessel itself. But sound is caused when a moving
body is enclosed in an unmoved body, and cannot be caused by one enclosed
in, and continuous with, a moving body which creates no friction.
We may say, then, in this matter that if the heavenly bodies moved
in a generally diffused mass of air or fire, as every one supposes,
their motion would necessarily cause a noise of tremendous strength
and such a noise would necessarily reach and shatter us. Since, therefore,
this effect is evidently not produced, it follows that none of them
can move with the motion either of animate nature or of constraint.
It is as though nature had foreseen the result, that if their movement
were other than it is, nothing on this earth could maintain its character.

That the stars are spherical and are not selfmoved, has now been explained.

Part 10

With their order-I mean the position of each, as involving the priority
of some and the posteriority of others, and their respective distances
from the extremity-with this astronomy may be left to deal, since
the astronomical discussion is adequate. This discussion shows that
the movements of the several stars depend, as regards the varieties
of speed which they exhibit, on the distance of each from the extremity.
It is established that the outermost revolution of the heavens is
a simple movement and the swiftest of all, and that the movement of
all other bodies is composite and relatively slow, for the reason
that each is moving on its own circle with the reverse motion to that
of the heavens. This at once leads us to expect that the body which
is nearest to that first simple revolution should take the longest
time to complete its circle, and that which is farthest from it the
shortest, the others taking a longer time the nearer they are and
a shorter time the farther away they are. For it is the nearest body
which is most strongly influenced, and the most remote, by reason
of its distance, which is least affected, the influence on the intermediate
bodies varying, as the mathematicians show, with their distance.

Part 11

With regard to the shape of each star, the most reasonable view is
that they are spherical. It has been shown that it is not in their
nature to move themselves, and, since nature is no wanton or random
creator, clearly she will have given things which possess no movement
a shape particularly unadapted to movement. Such a shape is the sphere,
since it possesses no instrument of movement. Clearly then their mass
will have the form of a sphere. Again, what holds of one holds of
all, and the evidence of our eyes shows us that the moon is spherical.
For how else should the moon as it waxes and wanes show for the most
part a crescent-shaped or gibbous figure, and only at one moment a
half-moon? And astronomical arguments give further confirmation; for
no other hypothesis accounts for the crescent shape of the sun's eclipses.
One, then, of the heavenly bodies being spherical, clearly the rest
will be spherical also. 

Part 12

There are two difficulties, which may very reasonably here be raised,
of which we must now attempt to state the probable solution: for we
regard the zeal of one whose thirst after philosophy leads him to
accept even slight indications where it is very difficult to see one's
way, as a proof rather of modesty than of overconfidence.

Of many such problems one of the strangest is the problem why we find
the greatest number of movements in the intermediate bodies, and not,
rather, in each successive body a variety of movement proportionate
to its distance from the primary motion. For we should expect, since
the primary body shows one motion only, that the body which is nearest
to it should move with the fewest movements, say two, and the one
next after that with three, or some similar arrangement. But the opposite
is the case. The movements of the sun and moon are fewer than those
of some of the planets. Yet these planets are farther from the centre
and thus nearer to the primary body than they, as observation has
itself revealed. For we have seen the moon, half-full, pass beneath
the planet Mars, which vanished on its shadow side and came forth
by the bright and shining part. Similar accounts of other stars are
given by the Egyptians and Babylonians, whose observations have been
kept for very many years past, and from whom much of our evidence
about particular stars is derived. A second difficulty which may with
equal justice be raised is this. Why is it that the primary motion
includes such a multitude of stars that their whole array seems to
defy counting, while of the other stars each one is separated off,
and in no case do we find two or more attached to the same motion?

On these questions, I say, it is well that we should seek to increase
our understanding, though we have but little to go upon, and are placed
at so great a distance from the facts in question. Nevertheless there
are certain principles on which if we base our consideration we shall
not find this difficulty by any means insoluble. We may object that
we have been thinking of the stars as mere bodies, and as units with
a serial order indeed but entirely inanimate; but should rather conceive
them as enjoying life and action. On this view the facts cease to
appear surprising. For it is natural that the best-conditioned of
all things should have its good without action, that which is nearest
to it should achieve it by little and simple action, and that which
is farther removed by a complexity of actions, just as with men's
bodies one is in good condition without exercise at all, another after
a short walk, while another requires running and wrestling and hard
training, and there are yet others who however hard they worked themselves
could never secure this good, but only some substitute for it. To
succeed often or in many things is difficult. For instance, to throw
ten thousand Coan throws with the dice would be impossible, but to
throw one or two is comparatively easy. In action, again, when A has
to be done to get B, B to get C, and C to get D, one step or two present
little difficulty, but as the series extends the difficulty grows.
We must, then, think of the action of the lower stars as similar to
that of animals and plants. For on our earth it is man that has the
greatest variety of actions-for there are many goods that man can
secure; hence his actions are various and directed to ends beyond
them-while the perfectly conditioned has no need of action, since
it is itself the end, and action always requires two terms, end and
means. The lower animals have less variety of action than man; and
plants perhaps have little action and of one kind only. For either
they have but one attainable good (as indeed man has), or, if several,
each contributes directly to their ultimate good. One thing then has
and enjoys the ultimate good, other things attain to it, one immediately
by few steps, another by many, while yet another does not even attempt
to secure it but is satisfied to reach a point not far removed from
that consummation. Thus, taking health as the end, there will be one
thing that always possesses health, others that attain it, one by
reducing flesh, another by running and thus reducing flesh, another
by taking steps to enable himself to run, thus further increasing
the number of movements, while another cannot attain health itself,
but only running or reduction of flesh, so that one or other of these
is for such a being the end. For while it is clearly best for any
being to attain the real end, yet, if that cannot be, the nearer it
is to the best the better will be its state. It is for this reason
that the earth moves not at all and the bodies near to it with few
movements. For they do not attain the final end, but only come as
near to it as their share in the divine principle permits. But the
first heaven finds it immediately with a single movement, and the
bodies intermediate between the first and last heavens attain it indeed,
but at the cost of a multiplicity of movement. 

As to the difficulty that into the one primary motion is crowded a
vast multitude of stars, while of the other stars each has been separately
given special movements of its own, there is in the first place this
reason for regarding the arrangement as a natural one. In thinking
of the life and moving principle of the several heavens one must regard
the first as far superior to the others. Such a superiority would
be reasonable. For this single first motion has to move many of the
divine bodies, while the numerous other motions move only one each,
since each single planet moves with a variety of motions. Thus, then,
nature makes matters equal and establishes a certain order, giving
to the single motion many bodies and to the single body many motions.
And there is a second reason why the other motions have each only
one body, in that each of them except the last, i.e. that which contains
the one star, is really moving many bodies. For this last sphere moves
with many others, to which it is fixed, each sphere being actually
a body; so that its movement will be a joint product. Each sphere,
in fact, has its particular natural motion, to which the general movement
is, as it were, added. But the force of any limited body is only adequate
to moving a limited body. 

The characteristics of the stars which move with a circular motion,
in respect of substance and shape, movement and order, have now been
sufficiently explained. 

Part 13

It remains to speak of the earth, of its position, of the question
whether it is at rest or in motion, and of its shape. 

I. As to its position there is some difference of opinion. Most people-all,
in fact, who regard the whole heaven as finite-say it lies at the
centre. But the Italian philosophers known as Pythagoreans take the
contrary view. At the centre, they say, is fire, and the earth is
one of the stars, creating night and day by its circular motion about
the centre. They further construct another earth in opposition to
ours to which they give the name counterearth. In all this they are
not seeking for theories and causes to account for observed facts,
but rather forcing their observations and trying to accommodate them
to certain theories and opinions of their own. But there are many
others who would agree that it is wrong to give the earth the central
position, looking for confirmation rather to theory than to the facts
of observation. Their view is that the most precious place befits
the most precious thing: but fire, they say, is more precious than
earth, and the limit than the intermediate, and the circumference
and the centre are limits. Reasoning on this basis they take the view
that it is not earth that lies at the centre of the sphere, but rather
fire. The Pythagoreans have a further reason. They hold that the most
important part of the world, which is the centre, should be most strictly
guarded, and name it, or rather the fire which occupies that place,
the 'Guardhouse of Zeus', as if the word 'centre' were quite unequivocal,
and the centre of the mathematical figure were always the same with
that of the thing or the natural centre. But it is better to conceive
of the case of the whole heaven as analogous to that of animals, in
which the centre of the animal and that of the body are different.
For this reason they have no need to be so disturbed about the world,
or to call in a guard for its centre: rather let them look for the
centre in the other sense and tell us what it is like and where nature
has set it. That centre will be something primary and precious; but
to the mere position we should give the last place rather than the
first. For the middle is what is defined, and what defines it is the
limit, and that which contains or limits is more precious than that
which is limited, see ing that the latter is the matter and the former
the essence of the system. 

II. As to the position of the earth, then, this is the view which
some advance, and the views advanced concerning its rest or motion
are similar. For here too there is no general agreement. All who deny
that the earth lies at the centre think that it revolves about the
centre, and not the earth only but, as we said before, the counter-earth
as well. Some of them even consider it possible that there are several
bodies so moving, which are invisible to us owing to the interposition
of the earth. This, they say, accounts for the fact that eclipses
of the moon are more frequent than eclipses of the sun: for in addition
to the earth each of these moving bodies can obstruct it. Indeed,
as in any case the surface of the earth is not actually a centre but
distant from it a full hemisphere, there is no more difficulty, they
think, in accounting for the observed facts on their view that we
do not dwell at the centre, than on the common view that the earth
is in the middle. Even as it is, there is nothing in the observations
to suggest that we are removed from the centre by half the diameter
of the earth. Others, again, say that the earth, which lies at the
centre, is 'rolled', and thus in motion, about the axis of the whole
heaven, So it stands written in the Timaeus. 

III. There are similar disputes about the shape of the earth. Some
think it is spherical, others that it is flat and drum-shaped. For
evidence they bring the fact that, as the sun rises and sets, the
part concealed by the earth shows a straight and not a curved edge,
whereas if the earth were spherical the line of section would have
to be circular. In this they leave out of account the great distance
of the sun from the earth and the great size of the circumference,
which, seen from a distance on these apparently small circles appears
straight. Such an appearance ought not to make them doubt the circular
shape of the earth. But they have another argument. They say that
because it is at rest, the earth must necessarily have this shape.
For there are many different ways in which the movement or rest of
the earth has been conceived. 

The difficulty must have occurred to every one. It would indeed be
a complacent mind that felt no surprise that, while a little bit of
earth, let loose in mid-air moves and will not stay still, and more
there is of it the faster it moves, the whole earth, free in midair,
should show no movement at all. Yet here is this great weight of earth,
and it is at rest. And again, from beneath one of these moving fragments
of earth, before it falls, take away the earth, and it will continue
its downward movement with nothing to stop it. The difficulty then,
has naturally passed into a common place of philosophy; and one may
well wonder that the solutions offered are not seen to involve greater
absurdities than the problem itself. 

By these considerations some have been led to assert that the earth
below us is infinite, saying, with Xenophanes of Colophon, that it
has 'pushed its roots to infinity',-in order to save the trouble of
seeking for the cause. Hence the sharp rebuke of Empedocles, in the
words 'if the deeps of the earth are endless and endless the ample
ether-such is the vain tale told by many a tongue, poured from the
mouths of those who have seen but little of the whole. Others say
the earth rests upon water. This, indeed, is the oldest theory that
has been preserved, and is attributed to Thales of Miletus. It was
supposed to stay still because it floated like wood and other similar
substances, which are so constituted as to rest upon but not upon
air. As if the same account had not to be given of the water which
carries the earth as of the earth itself! It is not the nature of
water, any more than of earth, to stay in mid-air: it must have something
to rest upon. Again, as air is lighter than water, so is water than
earth: how then can they think that the naturally lighter substance
lies below the heavier? Again, if the earth as a whole is capable
of floating upon water, that must obviously be the case with any part
of it. But observation shows that this is not the case. Any piece
of earth goes to the bottom, the quicker the larger it is. These thinkers
seem to push their inquiries some way into the problem, but not so
far as they might. It is what we are all inclined to do, to direct
our inquiry not by the matter itself, but by the views of our opponents:
and even when interrogating oneself one pushes the inquiry only to
the point at which one can no longer offer any opposition. Hence a
good inquirer will be one who is ready in bringing forward the objections
proper to the genus, and that he will be when he has gained an understanding
of all the differences. 

Anaximenes and Anaxagoras and Democritus give the flatness of the
earth as the cause of its staying still. Thus, they say, it does not
cut, but covers like a lid, the air beneath it. This seems to be the
way of flat-shaped bodies: for even the wind can scarcely move them
because of their power of resistance. The same immobility, they say,
is produced by the flatness of the surface which the earth presents
to the air which underlies it; while the air, not having room enough
to change its place because it is underneath the earth, stays there
in a mass, like the water in the case of the water-clock. And they
adduce an amount of evidence to prove that air, when cut off and at
rest, can bear a considerable weight. 

Now, first, if the shape of the earth is not flat, its flatness cannot
be the cause of its immobility. But in their own account it is rather
the size of the earth than its flatness that causes it to remain at
rest. For the reason why the air is so closely confined that it cannot
find a passage, and therefore stays where it is, is its great amount:
and this amount great because the body which isolates it, the earth,
is very large. This result, then, will follow, even if the earth is
spherical, so long as it retains its size. So far as their arguments
go, the earth will still be at rest. 

In general, our quarrel with those who speak of movement in this way
cannot be confined to the parts; it concerns the whole universe. One
must decide at the outset whether bodies have a natural movement or
not, whether there is no natural but only constrained movement. Seeing,
however, that we have already decided this matter to the best of our
ability, we are entitled to treat our results as representing fact.
Bodies, we say, which have no natural movement, have no constrained
movement; and where there is no natural and no constrained movement
there will be no movement at all. This is a conclusion, the necessity
of which we have already decided, and we have seen further that rest
also will be inconceivable, since rest, like movement, is either natural
or constrained. But if there is any natural movement, constraint will
not be the sole principle of motion or of rest. If, then, it is by
constraint that the earth now keeps its place, the so-called 'whirling'
movement by which its parts came together at the centre was also constrained.
(The form of causation supposed they all borrow from observations
of liquids and of air, in which the larger and heavier bodies always
move to the centre of the whirl. This is thought by all those who
try to generate the heavens to explain why the earth came together
at the centre. They then seek a reason for its staying there; and
some say, in the manner explained, that the reason is its size and
flatness, others, with Empedocles, that the motion of the heavens,
moving about it at a higher speed, prevents movement of the earth,
as the water in a cup, when the cup is given a circular motion, though
it is often underneath the bronze, is for this same reason prevented
from moving with the downward movement which is natural to it.) But
suppose both the 'whirl' and its flatness (the air beneath being withdrawn)
cease to prevent the earth's motion, where will the earth move to
then? Its movement to the centre was constrained, and its rest at
the centre is due to constraint; but there must be some motion which
is natural to it. Will this be upward motion or downward or what?
It must have some motion; and if upward and downward motion are alike
to it, and the air above the earth does not prevent upward movement,
then no more could air below it prevent downward movement. For the
same cause must necessarily have the same effect on the same thing.

Further, against Empedocles there is another point which might be
made. When the elements were separated off by Hate, what caused the
earth to keep its place? Surely the 'whirl' cannot have been then
also the cause. It is absurd too not to perceive that, while the whirling
movement may have been responsible for the original coming together
of the art of earth at the centre, the question remains, why now do
all heavy bodies move to the earth. For the whirl surely does not
come near us. Why, again, does fire move upward? Not, surely, because
of the whirl. But if fire is naturally such as to move in a certain
direction, clearly the same may be supposed to hold of earth. Again,
it cannot be the whirl which determines the heavy and the light. Rather
that movement caused the pre-existent heavy and light things to go
to the middle and stay on the surface respectively. Thus, before ever
the whirl began, heavy and light existed; and what can have been the
ground of their distinction, or the manner and direction of their
natural movements? In the infinite chaos there can have been neither
above nor below, and it is by these that heavy and light are determined.

It is to these causes that most writers pay attention: but there are
some, Anaximander, for instance, among the ancients, who say that
the earth keeps its place because of its indifference. Motion upward
and downward and sideways were all, they thought, equally inappropriate
to that which is set at the centre and indifferently related to every
extreme point; and to move in contrary directions at the same time
was impossible: so it must needs remain still. This view is ingenious
but not true. The argument would prove that everything, whatever it
be, which is put at the centre, must stay there. Fire, then, will
rest at the centre: for the proof turns on no peculiar property of
earth. But this does not follow. The observed facts about earth are
not only that it remains at the centre, but also that it moves to
the centre. The place to which any fragment of earth moves must necessarily
be the place to which the whole moves; and in the place to which a
thing naturally moves, it will naturally rest. The reason then is
not in the fact that the earth is indifferently related to every extreme
point: for this would apply to any body, whereas movement to the centre
is peculiar to earth. Again it is absurd to look for a reason why
the earth remains at the centre and not for a reason why fire remains
at the extremity. If the extremity is the natural place of fire, clearly
earth must also have a natural place. But suppose that the centre
is not its place, and that the reason of its remaining there is this
necessity of indifference-on the analogy of the hair which, it is
said, however great the tension, will not break under it, if it be
evenly distributed, or of the men who, though exceedingly hungry and
thirsty, and both equally, yet being equidistant from food and drink,
is therefore bound to stay where he is-even so, it still remains to
explain why fire stays at the extremities. It is strange, too, to
ask about things staying still but not about their motion,-why, I
mean, one thing, if nothing stops it, moves up, and another thing
to the centre. Again, their statements are not true. It happens, indeed,
to be the case that a thing to which movement this way and that is
equally inappropriate is obliged to remain at the centre. But so far
as their argument goes, instead of remaining there, it will move,
only not as a mass but in fragments. For the argument applies equally
to fire. Fire, if set at the centre, should stay there, like earth,
since it will be indifferently related to every point on the extremity.
Nevertheless it will move, as in fact it always does move when nothing
stops it, away from the centre to the extremity. It will not, however,
move in a mass to a single point on the circumference-the only possible
result on the lines of the indifference theory-but rather each corresponding
portion of fire to the corresponding part of the extremity, each fourth
part, for instance, to a fourth part of the circumference. For since
no body is a point, it will have parts. The expansion, when the body
increased the place occupied, would be on the same principle as the
contraction, in which the place was diminished. Thus, for all the
indifference theory shows to the contrary, earth also would have moved
in this manner away from the centre, unless the centre had been its
natural place. 

We have now outlined the views held as to the shape, position, and
rest or movement of the earth. 

Part 14

Let us first decide the question whether the earth moves or is at
rest. For, as we said, there are some who make it one of the stars,
and others who, setting it at the centre, suppose it to be 'rolled'
and in motion about the pole as axis. That both views are untenable
will be clear if we take as our starting-point the fact that the earth's
motion, whether the earth be at the centre or away from it, must needs
be a constrained motion. It cannot be the movement of the earth itself.
If it were, any portion of it would have this movement; but in fact
every part moves in a straight line to the centre. Being, then, constrained
and unnatural, the movement could not be eternal. But the order of
the universe is eternal. Again, everything that moves with the circular
movement, except the first sphere, is observed to be passed, and to
move with more than one motion. The earth, then, also, whether it
move about the centre or as stationary at it, must necessarily move
with two motions. But if this were so, there would have to be passings
and turnings of the fixed stars. Yet no such thing is observed. The
same stars always rise and set in the same parts of the earth.

Further, the natural movement of the earth, part and whole alike,
is the centre of the whole-whence the fact that it is now actually
situated at the centre-but it might be questioned since both centres
are the same, which centre it is that portions of earth and other
heavy things move to. Is this their goal because it is the centre
of the earth or because it is the centre of the whole? The goal, surely,
must be the centre of the whole. For fire and other light things move
to the extremity of the area which contains the centre. It happens,
however, that the centre of the earth and of the whole is the same.
Thus they do move to the centre of the earth, but accidentally, in
virtue of the fact that the earth's centre lies at the centre of the
whole. That the centre of the earth is the goal of their movement
is indicated by the fact that heavy bodies moving towards the earth
do not parallel but so as to make equal angles, and thus to a single
centre, that of the earth. It is clear, then, that the earth must
be at the centre and immovable, not only for the reasons already given,
but also because heavy bodies forcibly thrown quite straight upward
return to the point from which they started, even if they are thrown
to an infinite distance. From these considerations then it is clear
that the earth does not move and does not lie elsewhere than at the
centre. 

From what we have said the explanation of the earth's immobility is
also apparent. If it is the nature of earth, as observation shows,
to move from any point to the centre, as of fire contrariwise to move
from the centre to the extremity, it is impossible that any portion
of earth should move away from the centre except by constraint. For
a single thing has a single movement, and a simple thing a simple:
contrary movements cannot belong to the same thing, and movement away
from the centre is the contrary of movement to it. If then no portion
of earth can move away from the centre, obviously still less can the
earth as a whole so move. For it is the nature of the whole to move
to the point to which the part naturally moves. Since, then, it would
require a force greater than itself to move it, it must needs stay
at the centre. This view is further supported by the contributions
of mathematicians to astronomy, since the observations made as the
shapes change by which the order of the stars is determined, are fully
accounted for on the hypothesis that the earth lies at the centre.
Of the position of the earth and of the manner of its rest or movement,
our discussion may here end. 

Its shape must necessarily be spherical. For every portion of earth
has weight until it reaches the centre, and the jostling of parts
greater and smaller would bring about not a waved surface, but rather
compression and convergence of part and part until the centre is reached.
The process should be conceived by supposing the earth to come into
being in the way that some of the natural philosophers describe. Only
they attribute the downward movement to constraint, and it is better
to keep to the truth and say that the reason of this motion is that
a thing which possesses weight is naturally endowed with a centripetal
movement. When the mixture, then, was merely potential, the things
that were separated off moved similarly from every side towards the
centre. Whether the parts which came together at the centre were distributed
at the extremities evenly, or in some other way, makes no difference.
If, on the one hand, there were a similar movement from each quarter
of the extremity to the single centre, it is obvious that the resulting
mass would be similar on every side. For if an equal amount is added
on every side the extremity of the mass will be everywhere equidistant
from its centre, i.e. the figure will be spherical. But neither will
it in any way affect the argument if there is not a similar accession
of concurrent fragments from every side. For the greater quantity,
finding a lesser in front of it, must necessarily drive it on, both
having an impulse whose goal is the centre, and the greater weight
driving the lesser forward till this goal is reached. In this we have
also the solution of a possible difficulty. The earth, it might be
argued, is at the centre and spherical in shape: if, then, a weight
many times that of the earth were added to one hemisphere, the centre
of the earth and of the whole will no longer be coincident. So that
either the earth will not stay still at the centre, or if it does,
it will be at rest without having its centre at the place to which
it is still its nature to move. Such is the difficulty. A short consideration
will give us an easy answer, if we first give precision to our postulate
that any body endowed with weight, of whatever size, moves towards
the centre. Clearly it will not stop when its edge touches the centre.
The greater quantity must prevail until the body's centre occupies
the centre. For that is the goal of its impulse. Now it makes no difference
whether we apply this to a clod or common fragment of earth or to
the earth as a whole. The fact indicated does not depend upon degrees
of size but applies universally to everything that has the centripetal
impulse. Therefore earth in motion, whether in a mass or in fragments,
necessarily continues to move until it occupies the centre equally
every way, the less being forced to equalize itself by the greater
owing to the forward drive of the impulse. 

If the earth was generated, then, it must have been formed in this
way, and so clearly its generation was spherical; and if it is ungenerated
and has remained so always, its character must be that which the initial
generation, if it had occurred, would have given it. But the spherical
shape, necessitated by this argument, follows also from the fact that
the motions of heavy bodies always make equal angles, and are not
parallel. This would be the natural form of movement towards what
is naturally spherical. Either then the earth is spherical or it is
at least naturally spherical. And it is right to call anything that
which nature intends it to be, and which belongs to it, rather than
that which it is by constraint and contrary to nature. The evidence
of the senses further corroborates this. How else would eclipses of
the moon show segments shaped as we see them? As it is, the shapes
which the moon itself each month shows are of every kind straight,
gibbous, and concave-but in eclipses the outline is always curved:
and, since it is the interposition of the earth that makes the eclipse,
the form of this line will be caused by the form of the earth's surface,
which is therefore spherical. Again, our observations of the stars
make it evident, not only that the earth is circular, but also that
it is a circle of no great size. For quite a small change of position
to south or north causes a manifest alteration of the horizon. There
is much change, I mean, in the stars which are overhead, and the stars
seen are different, as one moves northward or southward. Indeed there
are some stars seen in Egypt and in the neighbourhood of Cyprus which
are not seen in the northerly regions; and stars, which in the north
are never beyond the range of observation, in those regions rise and
set. All of which goes to show not only that the earth is circular
in shape, but also that it is a sphere of no great size: for otherwise
the effect of so slight a change of place would not be quickly apparent.
Hence one should not be too sure of the incredibility of the view
of those who conceive that there is continuity between the parts about
the pillars of Hercules and the parts about India, and that in this
way the ocean is one. As further evidence in favour of this they quote
the case of elephants, a species occurring in each of these extreme
regions, suggesting that the common characteristic of these extremes
is explained by their continuity. Also, those mathematicians who try
to calculate the size of the earth's circumference arrive at the figure
400,000 stades. This indicates not only that the earth's mass is spherical
in shape, but also that as compared with the stars it is not of great
size. 



BOOK III

Part 1 

We have already discussed the first heaven and its parts, the moving
stars within it, the matter of which these are composed and their
bodily constitution, and we have also shown that they are ungenerated
and indestructible. Now things that we call natural are either substances
or functions and attributes of substances. As substances I class the
simple bodies-fire, earth, and the other terms of the series-and all
things composed of them; for example, the heaven as a whole and its
parts, animals, again, and plants and their parts. By attributes and
functions I mean the movements of these and of all other things in
which they have power in themselves to cause movement, and also their
alterations and reciprocal transformations. It is obvious, then, that
the greater part of the inquiry into nature concerns bodies: for a
natural substance is either a body or a thing which cannot come into
existence without body and magnitude. This appears plainly from an
analysis of the character of natural things, and equally from an inspection
of the instances of inquiry into nature. Since, then, we have spoken
of the primary element, of its bodily constitution, and of its freedom
from destruction and generation, it remains to speak of the other
two. In speaking of them we shall be obliged also to inquire into
generation and destruction. For if there is generation anywhere, it
must be in these elements and things composed of them. 

This is indeed the first question we have to ask: is generation a
fact or not? Earlier speculation was at variance both with itself
and with the views here put forward as to the true answer to this
question. Some removed generation and destruction from the world altogether.
Nothing that is, they said, is generated or destroyed, and our conviction
to the contrary is an illusion. So maintained the school of Melissus
and Parmenides. But however excellent their theories may otherwise
be, anyhow they cannot be held to speak as students of nature. There
may be things not subject to generation or any kind of movement, but
if so they belong to another and a higher inquiry than the study of
nature. They, however, had no idea of any form of being other than
the substance of things perceived; and when they saw, what no one
previously had seen, that there could be no knowledge or wisdom without
some such unchanging entities, they naturally transferred what was
true of them to things perceived. Others, perhaps intentionally, maintain
precisely the contrary opinion to this. It has been asserted that
everything in the world was subject to generation and nothing was
ungenerated, but that after being generated some things remained indestructible
while the rest were again destroyed. This had been asserted in the
first instance by Hesiod and his followers, but afterwards outside
his circle by the earliest natural philosophers. But what these thinkers
maintained was that all else has been generated and, as they said,
'is flowing away, nothing having any solidity, except one single thing
which persists as the basis of all these transformations. So we may
interpret the statements of Heraclitus of Ephesus and many others.
And some subject all bodies whatever to generation, by means of the
composition and separation of planes. 

Discussion of the other views may be postponed. But this last theory
which composes every body of planes is, as the most superficial observation
shows, in many respects in plain contradiction with mathematics. It
is, however, wrong to remove the foundations of a science unless you
can replace them with others more convincing. And, secondly, the same
theory which composes solids of planes clearly composes planes of
lines and lines of points, so that a part of a line need not be a
line. This matter has been already considered in our discussion of
movement, where we have shown that an indivisible length is impossible.
But with respect to natural bodies there are impossibilities involved
in the view which asserts indivisible lines, which we may briefly
consider at this point. For the impossible consequences which result
from this view in the mathematical sphere will reproduce themselves
when it is applied to physical bodies, but there will be difficulties
in physics which are not present in mathematics; for mathematics deals
with an abstract and physics with a more concrete object. There are
many attributes necessarily present in physical bodies which are necessarily
excluded by indivisibility; all attributes, in fact, which are divisible.
There can be nothing divisible in an indivisible thing, but the attributes
of bodies are all divisible in one of two ways. They are divisible
into kinds, as colour is divided into white and black, and they are
divisible per accidens when that which has them is divisible. In this
latter sense attributes which are simple are nevertheless divisible.
Attributes of this kind will serve, therefore, to illustrate the impossibility
of the view. It is impossible, if two parts of a thing have no weight,
that the two together should have weight. But either all perceptible
bodies or some, such as earth and water, have weight, as these thinkers
would themselves admit. Now if the point has no weight, clearly the
lines have not either, and, if they have not, neither have the planes.
Therefore no body has weight. It is, further, manifest that their
point cannot have weight. For while a heavy thing may always be heavier
than something and a light thing lighter than something, a thing which
is heavier or lighter than something need not be itself heavy or light,
just as a large thing is larger than others, but what is larger is
not always large. A thing which, judged absolutely, is small may none
the less be larger than other things. Whatever, then, is heavy and
also heavier than something else, must exceed this by something which
is heavy. A heavy thing therefore is always divisible. But it is common
ground that a point is indivisible. Again, suppose that what is heavy
or weight is a dense body, and what is light rare. Dense differs from
rare in containing more matter in the same cubic area. A point, then,
if it may be heavy or light, may be dense or rare. But the dense is
divisible while a point is indivisible. And if what is heavy must
be either hard or soft, an impossible consequence is easy to draw.
For a thing is soft if its surface can be pressed in, hard if it cannot;
and if it can be pressed in it is divisible. 

Moreover, no weight can consist of parts not possessing weight. For
how, except by the merest fiction, can they specify the number and
character of the parts which will produce weight? And, further, when
one weight is greater than another, the difference is a third weight;
from which it will follow that every indivisible part possesses weight.
For suppose that a body of four points possesses weight. A body composed
of more than four points will superior in weight to it, a thing which
has weight. But the difference between weight and weight must be a
weight, as the difference between white and whiter is white. Here
the difference which makes the superior weight heavier is the single
point which remains when the common number, four, is subtracted. A
single point, therefore, has weight. 

Further, to assume, on the one hand, that the planes can only be put
in linear contact would be ridiculous. For just as there are two ways
of putting lines together, namely, end to and side by side, so there
must be two ways of putting planes together. Lines can be put together
so that contact is linear by laying one along the other, though not
by putting them end to end. But if, similarly, in putting the lanes
together, superficial contact is allowed as an alternative to linear,
that method will give them bodies which are not any element nor composed
of elements. Again, if it is the number of planes in a body that makes
one heavier than another, as the Timaeus explains, clearly the line
and the point will have weight. For the three cases are, as we said
before, analogous. But if the reason of differences of weight is not
this, but rather the heaviness of earth and the lightness of fire,
then some of the planes will be light and others heavy (which involves
a similar distinction in the lines and the points); the earthplane,
I mean, will be heavier than the fire-plane. In general, the result
is either that there is no magnitude at all, or that all magnitude
could be done away with. For a point is to a line as a line is to
a plane and as a plane is to a body. Now the various forms in passing
into one another will each be resolved into its ultimate constituents.
It might happen therefore that nothing existed except points, and
that there was no body at all. A further consideration is that if
time is similarly constituted, there would be, or might be, a time
at which it was done away with. For the indivisible now is like a
point in a line. The same consequences follow from composing the heaven
of numbers, as some of the Pythagoreans do who make all nature out
of numbers. For natural bodies are manifestly endowed with weight
and lightness, but an assemblage of units can neither be composed
to form a body nor possess weight. 

Part 2

The necessity that each of the simple bodies should have a natural
movement may be shown as follows. They manifestly move, and if they
have no proper movement they must move by constraint: and the constrained
is the same as the unnatural. Now an unnatural movement presupposes
a natural movement which it contravenes, and which, however many the
unnatural movements, is always one. For naturally a thing moves in
one way, while its unnatural movements are manifold. The same may
be shown, from the fact of rest. Rest, also, must either be constrained
or natural, constrained in a place to which movement was constrained,
natural in a place movement to which was natural. Now manifestly there
is a body which is at rest at the centre. If then this rest is natural
to it, clearly motion to this place is natural to it. If, on the other
hand, its rest is constrained, what is hindering its motion? Something,
which is at rest: but if so, we shall simply repeat the same argument;
and either we shall come to an ultimate something to which rest where
it is or we shall have an infinite process, which is impossible. The
hindrance to its movement, then, we will suppose, is a moving thing-as
Empedocles says that it is the vortex which keeps the earth still-:
but in that case we ask, where would it have moved to but for the
vortex? It could not move infinitely; for to traverse an infinite
is impossible, and impossibilities do not happen. So the moving thing
must stop somewhere, and there rest not by constraint but naturally.
But a natural rest proves a natural movement to the place of rest.
Hence Leucippus and Democritus, who say that the primary bodies are
in perpetual movement in the void or infinite, may be asked to explain
the manner of their motion and the kind of movement which is natural
to them. For if the various elements are constrained by one another
to move as they do, each must still have a natural movement which
the constrained contravenes, and the prime mover must cause motion
not by constraint but naturally. If there is no ultimate natural cause
of movement and each preceding term in the series is always moved
by constraint, we shall have an infinite process. The same difficulty
is involved even if it is supposed, as we read in the Timaeus, that
before the ordered world was made the elements moved without order.
Their movement must have been due either to constraint or to their
nature. And if their movement was natural, a moment's consideration
shows that there was already an ordered world. For the prime mover
must cause motion in virtue of its own natural movement, and the other
bodies, moving without constraint, as they came to rest in their proper
places, would fall into the order in which they now stand, the heavy
bodies moving towards the centre and the light bodies away from it.
But that is the order of their distribution in our world. There is
a further question, too, which might be asked. Is it possible or impossible
that bodies in unordered movement should combine in some cases into
combinations like those of which bodies of nature's composing are
composed, such, I mean, as bones and flesh? Yet this is what Empedocles
asserts to have occurred under Love. 'Many a head', says he, 'came
to birth without a neck.' The answer to the view that there are infinite
bodies moving in an infinite is that, if the cause of movement is
single, they must move with a single motion, and therefore not without
order; and if, on the other hand, the causes are of infinite variety,
their motions too must be infinitely varied. For a finite number of
causes would produce a kind of order, since absence of order is not
proved by diversity of direction in motions: indeed, in the world
we know, not all bodies, but only bodies of the same kind, have a
common goal of movement. Again, disorderly movement means in reality
unnatural movement, since the order proper to perceptible things is
their nature. And there is also absurdity and impossibility in the
notion that the disorderly movement is infinitely continued. For the
nature of things is the nature which most of them possess for most
of the time. Thus their view brings them into the contrary position
that disorder is natural, and order or system unnatural. But no natural
fact can originate in chance. This is a point which Anaxagoras seems
to have thoroughly grasped; for he starts his cosmogony from unmoved
things. The others, it is true, make things collect together somehow
before they try to produce motion and separation. But there is no
sense in starting generation from an original state in which bodies
are separated and in movement. Hence Empedocles begins after the process
ruled by Love: for he could not have constructed the heaven by building
it up out of bodies in separation, making them to combine by the power
of Love, since our world has its constituent elements in separation,
and therefore presupposes a previous state of unity and combination.

These arguments make it plain that every body has its natural movement,
which is not constrained or contrary to its nature. We go on to show
that there are certain bodies whose necessary impetus is that of weight
and lightness. Of necessity, we assert, they must move, and a moved
thing which has no natural impetus cannot move either towards or away
from the centre. Suppose a body A without weight, and a body B endowed
with weight. Suppose the weightless body to move the distance CD,
while B in the same time moves the distance Ce, which will be greater
since the heavy thing must move further. Let the heavy body then be
divided in the proportion CE: CD (for there is no reason why a part
of B should not stand in this relation to the whole). Now if the whole
moves the whole distance CE, the part must in the same time move the
distance CD. A weightless body, therefore, and one which has weight
will move the same distance, which is impossible. And the same argument
would fit the case of lightness. Again, a body which is in motion
but has neither weight nor lightness, must be moved by constraint,
and must continue its constrained movement infinitely. For there will
be a force which moves it, and the smaller and lighter a body is the
further will a given force move it. Now let A, the weightless body,
be moved the distance Ce, and B, which has weight, be moved in the
same time the distance Cd. Dividing the heavy body in the proportion
CE:CD, we subtract from the heavy body a part which will in the same
time move the distance CE, since the whole moved CD: for the relative
speeds of the two bodies will be in inverse ratio to their respective
sizes. Thus the weightless body will move the same distance as the
heavy in the same time. But this is impossible. Hence, since the motion
of the weightless body will cover a greater distance than any that
is suggested, it will continue infinitely. It is therefore obvious
that every body must have a definite weight or lightness. But since
'nature' means a source of movement within the thing itself, while
a force is a source of movement in something other than it or in itself
qua other, and since movement is always due either to nature or to
constraint, movement which is natural, as downward movement is to
a stone, will be merely accelerated by an external force, while an
unnatural movement will be due to the force alone. In either case
the air is as it were instrumental to the force. For air is both light
and heavy, and thus qua light produces upward motion, being propelled
and set in motion by the force, and qua heavy produces a downward
motion. In either case the force transmits the movement to the body
by first, as it were, impregnating the air. That is why a body moved
by constraint continues to move when that which gave the impulse ceases
to accompany it. Otherwise, i.e. if the air were not endowed with
this function, constrained movement would be impossible. And the natural
movement of a body may be helped on in the same way. This discussion
suffices to show (1) that all bodies are either light or heavy, and
(2) how unnatural movement takes place. 

From what has been said earlier it is plain that there cannot be generation
either of everything or in an absolute sense of anything. It is impossible
that everything should be generated, unless an extra-corporeal void
is possible. For, assuming generation, the place which is to be occupied
by that which is coming to be, must have been previously occupied
by void in which no body was. Now it is quite possible for one body
to be generated out of another, air for instance out of fire, but
in the absence of any pre-existing mass generation is impossible.
That which is potentially a certain kind of body may, it is true,
become such in actuality, But if the potential body was not already
in actuality some other kind of body, the existence of an extra-corporeal
void must be admitted. 

Part 3

It remains to say what bodies are subject to generation, and why.
Since in every case knowledge depends on what is primary, and the
elements are the primary constituents of bodies, we must ask which
of such bodies are elements, and why; and after that what is their
number and character. The answer will be plain if we first explain
what kind of substance an element is. An element, we take it, is a
body into which other bodies may be analysed, present in them potentially
or in actuality (which of these, is still disputable), and not itself
divisible into bodies different in form. That, or something like it,
is what all men in every case mean by element. Now if what we have
described is an element, clearly there must be such bodies. For flesh
and wood and all other similar bodies contain potentially fire and
earth, since one sees these elements exuded from them; and, on the
other hand, neither in potentiality nor in actuality does fire contain
flesh or wood, or it would exude them. Similarly, even if there were
only one elementary body, it would not contain them. For though it
will be either flesh or bone or something else, that does not at once
show that it contained these in potentiality: the further question
remains, in what manner it becomes them. Now Anaxagoras opposes Empedocles'
view of the elements. Empedocles says that fire and earth and the
related bodies are elementary bodies of which all things are composed;
but this Anaxagoras denies. His elements are the homoeomerous things,
viz. flesh, bone, and the like. Earth and fire are mixtures, composed
of them and all the other seeds, each consisting of a collection of
all the homoeomerous bodies, separately invisible; and that explains
why from these two bodies all others are generated. (To him fire and
aither are the same thing.) But since every natural body has it proper
movement, and movements are either simple or mixed, mixed in mixed
bodies and simple in simple, there must obviously be simple bodies;
for there are simple movements. It is plain, then, that there are
elements, and why. 

Part 4

The next question to consider is whether the elements are finite or
infinite in number, and, if finite, what their number is. Let us first
show reason or denying that their number is infinite, as some suppose.
We begin with the view of Anaxagoras that all the homoeomerous bodies
are elements. Any one who adopts this view misapprehends the meaning
of element. Observation shows that even mixed bodies are often divisible
into homoeomerous parts; examples are flesh, bone, wood, and stone.
Since then the composite cannot be an element, not every homoeomerous
body can be an element; only, as we said before, that which is not
divisible into bodies different in form. But even taking 'element'
as they do, they need not assert an infinity of elements, since the
hypothesis of a finite number will give identical results. Indeed
even two or three such bodies serve the purpose as well, as Empedocles'
attempt shows. Again, even on their view it turns out that all things
are not composed of homocomerous bodies. They do not pretend that
a face is composed of faces, or that any other natural conformation
is composed of parts like itself. Obviously then it would be better
to assume a finite number of principles. They should, in fact, be
as few as possible, consistently with proving what has to be proved.
This is the common demand of mathematicians, who always assume as
principles things finite either in kind or in number. Again, if body
is distinguished from body by the appropriate qualitative difference,
and there is a limit to the number of differences (for the difference
lies in qualities apprehended by sense, which are in fact finite in
number, though this requires proof), then manifestly there is necessarily
a limit to the number of elements. 

There is, further, another view-that of Leucippus and Democritus of
Abdera-the implications of which are also unacceptable. The primary
masses, according to them, are infinite in number and indivisible
in mass: one cannot turn into many nor many into one; and all things
are generated by their combination and involution. Now this view in
a sense makes things out to be numbers or composed of numbers. The
exposition is not clear, but this is its real meaning. And further,
they say that since the atomic bodies differ in shape, and there is
an infinity of shapes, there is an infinity of simple bodies. But
they have never explained in detail the shapes of the various elements,
except so far to allot the sphere to fire. Air, water, and the rest
they distinguished by the relative size of the atom, assuming that
the atomic substance was a sort of master-seed for each and every
element. Now, in the first place, they make the mistake already noticed.
The principles which they assume are not limited in number, though
such limitation would necessitate no other alteration in their theory.
Further, if the differences of bodies are not infinite, plainly the
elements will not be an infinity. Besides, a view which asserts atomic
bodies must needs come into conflict with the mathematical sciences,
in addition to invalidating many common opinions and apparent data
of sense perception. But of these things we have already spoken in
our discussion of time and movement. They are also bound to contradict
themselves. For if the elements are atomic, air, earth, and water
cannot be differentiated by the relative sizes of their atoms, since
then they could not be generated out of one another. The extrusion
of the largest atoms is a process that will in time exhaust the supply;
and it is by such a process that they account for the generation of
water, air, and earth from one another. Again, even on their own presuppositions
it does not seem as if the clements would be infinite in number. The
atoms differ in figure, and all figures are composed of pyramids,
rectilinear the case of rectilinear figures, while the sphere has
eight pyramidal parts. The figures must have their principles, and,
whether these are one or two or more, the simple bodies must be the
same in number as they. Again, if every element has its proper movement,
and a simple body has a simple movement, and the number of simple
movements is not infinite, because the simple motions are only two
and the number of places is not infinite, on these grounds also we
should have to deny that the number of elements is infinite.

Part 5

Since the number of the elements must be limited, it remains to inquire
whether there is more than one element. Some assume one only, which
is according to some water, to others air, to others fire, to others
again something finer than water and denser than air, an infinite
body-so they say-bracing all the heavens. 

Now those who decide for a single element, which is either water or
air or a body finer than water and denser than air, and proceed to
generate other things out of it by use of the attributes density and
rarity, all alike fail to observe the fact that they are depriving
the element of its priority. Generation out of the elements is, as
they say, synthesis, and generation into the elements is analysis,
so that the body with the finer parts must have priority in the order
of nature. But they say that fire is of all bodies the finest. Hence
fire will be first in the natural order. And whether the finest body
is fire or not makes no difference; anyhow it must be one of the other
bodies that is primary and not that which is intermediate. Again,
density and rarity, as instruments of generation, are equivalent to
fineness and coarseness, since the fine is rare, and coarse in their
use means dense. But fineness and coarseness, again, are equivalent
to greatness and smallness, since a thing with small parts is fine
and a thing with large parts coarse. For that which spreads itself
out widely is fine, and a thing composed of small parts is so spread
out. In the end, then, they distinguish the various other substances
from the element by the greatness and smallness of their parts. This
method of distinction makes all judgement relative. There will be
no absolute distinction between fire, water, and air, but one and
the same body will be relatively to this fire, relatively to something
else air. The same difficulty is involved equally in the view elements
and distinguishes them by their greatness and smallness. The principle
of distinction between bodies being quantity, the various sizes will
be in a definite ratio, and whatever bodies are in this ratio to one
another must be air, fire, earth, and water respectively. For the
ratios of smaller bodies may be repeated among greater bodies.

Those who start from fire as the single element, while avoiding this
difficulty, involve themselves in many others. Some of them give fire
a particular shape, like those who make it a pyramid, and this on
one of two grounds. The reason given may be-more crudely-that the
pyramid is the most piercing of figures as fire is of bodies, or-more
ingeniously-the position may be supported by the following argument.
As all bodies are composed of that which has the finest parts, so
all solid figures are composed of pryamids: but the finest body is
fire, while among figures the pyramid is primary and has the smallest
parts; and the primary body must have the primary figure: therefore
fire will be a pyramid. Others, again, express no opinion on the subject
of its figure, but simply regard it as the of the finest parts, which
in combination will form other bodies, as the fusing of gold-dust
produces solid gold. Both of these views involve the same difficulties.
For (1) if, on the one hand, they make the primary body an atom, the
view will be open to the objections already advanced against the atomic
theory. And further the theory is inconsistent with a regard for the
facts of nature. For if all bodies are quantitatively commensurable,
and the relative size of the various homoeomerous masses and of their
several elements are in the same ratio, so that the total mass of
water, for instance, is related to the total mass of air as the elements
of each are to one another, and so on, and if there is more air than
water and, generally, more of the finer body than of the coarser,
obviously the element of water will be smaller than that of air. But
the lesser quantity is contained in the greater. Therefore the air
element is divisible. And the same could be shown of fire and of all
bodies whose parts are relatively fine. (2) If, on the other hand,
the primary body is divisible, then (a) those who give fire a special
shape will have to say that a part of fire is not fire, because a
pyramid is not composed of pyramids, and also that not every body
is either an element or composed of elements, since a part of fire
will be neither fire nor any other element. And (b) those whose ground
of distinction is size will have to recognize an element prior to
the element, a regress which continues infinitely, since every body
is divisible and that which has the smallest parts is the element.
Further, they too will have to say that the same body is relatively
to this fire and relatively to that air, to others again water and
earth. 

The common error of all views which assume a single element is that
they allow only one natural movement, which is the same for every
body. For it is a matter of observation that a natural body possesses
a principle of movement. If then all bodies are one, all will have
one movement. With this motion the greater their quantity the more
they will move, just as fire, in proportion as its quantity is greater,
moves faster with the upward motion which belongs to it. But the fact
is that increase of quantity makes many things move the faster downward.
For these reasons, then, as well as from the distinction already established
of a plurality of natural movements, it is impossible that there should
be only one element. But if the elements are not an infinity and not
reducible to one, they must be several and finite in number.

Part 6

First we must inquire whether the elements are eternal or subject
to generation and destruction; for when this question has been answered
their number and character will be manifest. In the first place, they
cannot be eternal. It is a matter of observation that fire, water,
and every simple body undergo a process of analysis, which must either
continue infinitely or stop somewhere. (1) Suppose it infinite. Then
the time occupied by the process will be infinite, and also that occupied
by the reverse process of synthesis. For the processes of analysis
and synthesis succeed one another in the various parts. It will follow
that there are two infinite times which are mutually exclusive, the
time occupied by the synthesis, which is infinite, being preceded
by the period of analysis. There are thus two mutually exclusive infinites,
which is impossible. (2) Suppose, on the other hand, that the analysis
stops somewhere. Then the body at which it stops will be either atomic
or, as Empedocles seems to have intended, a divisible body which will
yet never be divided. The foregoing arguments show that it cannot
be an atom; but neither can it be a divisible body which analysis
will never reach. For a smaller body is more easily destroyed than
a larger; and a destructive process which succeeds in destroying,
that is, in resolving into smaller bodies, a body of some size, cannot
reasonably be expected to fail with the smaller body. Now in fire
we observe a destruction of two kinds: it is destroyed by its contrary
when it is quenched, and by itself when it dies out. But the effect
is produced by a greater quantity upon a lesser, and the more quickly
the smaller it is. The elements of bodies must therefore be subject
to destruction and generation. 

Since they are generated, they must be generated either from something
incorporeal or from a body, and if from a body, either from one another
or from something else. The theory which generates them from something
incorporeal requires an extra-corporeal void. For everything that
comes to be comes to be in something, and that in which the generation
takes place must either be incorporeal or possess body; and if it
has body, there will be two bodies in the same place at the same time,
viz. that which is coming to be and that which was previously there,
while if it is incorporeal, there must be an extra-corporeal void.
But we have already shown that this is impossible. But, on the other
hand, it is equally impossible that the elements should be generated
from some kind of body. That would involve a body distinct from the
elements and prior to them. But if this body possesses weight or lightness,
it will be one of the elements; and if it has no tendency to movement,
it will be an immovable or mathematical entity, and therefore not
in a place at all. A place in which a thing is at rest is a place
in which it might move, either by constraint, i.e. unnaturally, or
in the absence of constraint, i.e. naturally. If, then, it is in a
place and somewhere, it will be one of the elements; and if it is
not in a place, nothing can come from it, since that which comes into
being and that out of which it comes must needs be together. The elements
therefore cannot be generated from something incorporeal nor from
a body which is not an element, and the only remaining alternative
is that they are generated from one another. 

Part 7

We must, therefore, turn to the question, what is the manner of their
generation from one another? Is it as Empedocles and Democritus say,
or as those who resolve bodies into planes say, or is there yet another
possibility? (1) What the followers of Empedocles do, though without
observing it themselves, is to reduce the generation of elements out
of one another to an illusion. They make it a process of excretion
from a body of what was in it all the time-as though generation required
a vessel rather than a material-so that it involves no change of anything.
And even if this were accepted, there are other implications equally
unsatisfactory. We do not expect a mass of matter to be made heavier
by compression. But they will be bound to maintain this, if they say
that water is a body present in air and excreted from air, since air
becomes heavier when it turns into water. Again, when the mixed body
is divided, they can show no reason why one of the constituents must
by itself take up more room than the body did: but when water turns
into air, the room occupied is increased. The fact is that the finer
body takes up more room, as is obvious in any case of transformation.
As the liquid is converted into vapour or air the vessel which contains
it is often burst because it does not contain room enough. Now, if
there is no void at all, and if, as those who take this view say,
there is no expansion of bodies, the impossibility of this is manifest:
and if there is void and expansion, there is no accounting for the
fact that the body which results from division cfpies of necessity
a greater space. It is inevitable, too, that generation of one out
of another should come to a stop, since a finite quantum cannot contain
an infinity of finite quanta. When earth produces water something
is taken away from the earth, for the process is one of excretion.
The same thing happens again when the residue produces water. But
this can only go on for ever, if the finite body contains an infinity,
which is impossible. Therefore the generation of elements out of one
another will not always continue. 

(2) We have now explained that the mutual transformations of the elements
cannot take place by means of excretion. The remaining alternative
is that they should be generated by changing into one another. And
this in one of two ways, either by change of shape, as the same wax
takes the shape both of a sphere and of a cube, or, as some assert,
by resolution into planes. (a) Generation by change of shape would
necessarily involve the assertion of atomic bodies. For if the particles
were divisible there would be a part of fire which was not fire and
a part of earth which was not earth, for the reason that not every
part of a pyramid is a pyramid nor of a cube a cube. But if (b) the
process is resolution into planes, the first difficulty is that the
elements cannot all be generated out of one another. This they are
obliged to assert, and do assert. It is absurd, because it is unreasonable
that one element alone should have no part in the transformations,
and also contrary to the observed data of sense, according to which
all alike change into one another. In fact their explanation of the
observations is not consistent with the observations. And the reason
is that their ultimate principles are wrongly assumed: they had certain
predetermined views, and were resolved to bring everything into line
with them. It seems that perceptible things require perceptible principles,
eternal things eternal principles, corruptible things corruptible
principles; and, in general, every subject matter principles homogeneous
with itself. But they, owing to their love for their principles, fall
into the attitude of men who undertake the defence of a position in
argument. In the confidence that the principles are true they are
ready to accept any consequence of their application. As though some
principles did not require to be judged from their results, and particularly
from their final issue! And that issue, which in the case of productive
knowledge is the product, in the knowledge of nature is the unimpeachable
evidence of the senses as to each fact. 

The result of their view is that earth has the best right to the name
element, and is alone indestructible; for that which is indissoluble
is indestructible and elementary, and earth alone cannot be dissolved
into any body but itself. Again, in the case of those elements which
do suffer dissolution, the 'suspension' of the triangles is unsatisfactory.
But this takes place whenever one is dissolved into another, because
of the numerical inequality of the triangles which compose them. Further,
those who hold these views must needs suppose that generation does
not start from a body. For what is generated out of planes cannot
be said to have been generated from a body. And they must also assert
that not all bodies are divisible, coming thus into conflict with
our most accurate sciences, namely the mathematical, which assume
that even the intelligible is divisible, while they, in their anxiety
to save their hypothesis, cannot even admit this of every perceptible
thing. For any one who gives each element a shape of its own, and
makes this the ground of distinction between the substances, has to
attribute to them indivisibility; since division of a pyramid or a
sphere must leave somewhere at least a residue which is not sphere
or a pyramid. Either, then, a part of fire is not fire, so that there
is a body prior to the element-for every body is either an element
or composed of elements-or not every body is divisible. 

Part 8

In general, the attempt to give a shape to each of the simple bodies
is unsound, for the reason, first, that they will not succeed in filling
the whole. It is agreed that there are only three plane figures which
can fill a space, the triangle, the square, and the hexagon, and only
two solids, the pyramid and the cube. But the theory needs more than
these because the elements which it recognizes are more in number.
Secondly, it is manifest that the simple bodies are often given a
shape by the place in which they are included, particularly water
and air. In such a case the shape of the element cannot persist; for,
if it did, the contained mass would not be in continuous contact with
the containing body; while, if its shape is changed, it will cease
to be water, since the distinctive quality is shape. Clearly, then,
their shapes are not fixed. Indeed, nature itself seems to offer corroboration
of this theoretical conclusion. Just as in other cases the substratum
must be formless and unshapen-for thus the 'all-receptive', as we
read in the Timaeus, will be best for modelling-so the elements should
be conceived as a material for composite things; and that is why they
can put off their qualitative distinctions and pass into one another.
Further, how can they account for the generation of flesh and bone
or any other continuous body? The elements alone cannot produce them
because their collocation cannot produce a continuum. Nor can the
composition of planes; for this produces the elements themselves,
not bodies made up of them. Any one then who insists upon an exact
statement of this kind of theory, instead of assenting after a passing
glance at it, will see that it removes generation from the world.

Further, the very properties, powers, and motions, to which they paid
particular attention in allotting shapes, show the shapes not to be
in accord with the bodies. Because fire is mobile and productive of
heat and combustion, some made it a sphere, others a pyramid. These
shapes, they thought, were the most mobile because they offer the
fewest points of contact and are the least stable of any; they were
also the most apt to produce warmth and combustion, because the one
is angular throughout while the other has the most acute angles, and
the angles, they say, produce warmth and combustion. Now, in the first
place, with regard to movement both are in error. These may be the
figures best adapted to movement; they are not, however, well adapted
to the movement of fire, which is an upward and rectilinear movement,
but rather to that form of circular movement which we call rolling.
Earth, again, they call a cube because it is stable and at rest. But
it rests only in its own place, not anywhere; from any other it moves
if nothing hinders, and fire and the other bodies do the same. The
obvious inference, therefore, is that fire and each several element
is in a foreign place a sphere or a pyramid, but in its own a cube.
Again, if the possession of angles makes a body produce heat and combustion,
every element produces heat, though one may do so more than another.
For they all possess angles, the octahedron and dodecahedron as well
as the pyramid; and Democritus makes even the sphere a kind of angle,
which cuts things because of its mobility. The difference, then, will
be one of degree: and this is plainly false. They must also accept
the inference that the mathematical produce heat and combustion, since
they too possess angles and contain atomic spheres and pyramids, especially
if there are, as they allege, atomic figures. Anyhow if these functions
belong to some of these things and not to others, they should explain
the difference, instead of speaking in quite general terms as they
do. Again, combustion of a body produces fire, and fire is a sphere
or a pyramid. The body, then, is turned into spheres or pyramids.
Let us grant that these figures may reasonably be supposed to cut
and break up bodies as fire does; still it remains quite inexplicable
that a pyramid must needs produce pyramids or a sphere spheres. One
might as well postulate that a knife or a saw divides things into
knives or saws. It is also ridiculous to think only of division when
allotting fire its shape. Fire is generally thought of as combining
and connecting rather than as separating. For though it separates
bodies different in kind, it combines those which are the same; and
the combining is essential to it, the functions of connecting and
uniting being a mark of fire, while the separating is incidental.
For the expulsion of the foreign body is an incident in the compacting
of the homogeneous. In choosing the shape, then, they should have
thought either of both functions or preferably of the combining function.
In addition, since hot and cold are contrary powers, it is impossible
to allot any shape to the cold. For the shape given must be the contrary
of that given to the hot, but there is no contrariety between figures.
That is why they have all left the cold out, though properly either
all or none should have their distinguishing figures. Some of them,
however, do attempt to explain this power, and they contradict themselves.
A body of large particles, they say, is cold because instead of penetrating
through the passages it crushes. Clearly, then, that which is hot
is that which penetrates these passages, or in other words that which
has fine particles. It results that hot and cold are distinguished
not by the figure but by the size of the particles. Again, if the
pyramids are unequal in size, the large ones will not be fire, and
that figure will produce not combustion but its contrary.

From what has been said it is clear that the difference of the elements
does not depend upon their shape. Now their most important differences
are those of property, function, and power; for every natural body
has, we maintain, its own functions, properties, and powers. Our first
business, then, will be to speak of these, and that inquiry will enable
us to explain the differences of each from each. 



BOOK IV

Part 1 

We have now to consider the terms 'heavy' and 'light'. We must ask
what the bodies so called are, how they are constituted, and what
is the reason of their possessing these powers. The consideration
of these questions is a proper part of the theory of movement, since
we call things heavy and light because they have the power of being
moved naturally in a certain way. The activities corresponding to
these powers have not been given any name, unless it is thought that
'impetus' is such a name. But because the inquiry into nature is concerned
with movement, and these things have in themselves some spark (as
it were) of movement, all inquirers avail themselves of these powers,
though in all but a few cases without exact discrimination. We must
then first look at whatever others have said, and formulate the questions
which require settlement in the interests of this inquiry, before
we go on to state our own view of the matter. 

Language recognizes (a) an absolute, (b) a relative heavy and light.
Of two heavy things, such as wood and bronze, we say that the one
is relatively light, the other relatively heavy. Our predecessors
have not dealt at all with the absolute use, of the terms, but only
with the relative. I mean, they do not explain what the heavy is or
what the light is, but only the relative heaviness and lightness of
things possessing weight. This can be made clearer as follows. There
are things whose constant nature it is to move away from the centre,
while others move constantly towards the centre; and of these movements
that which is away from the centre I call upward movement and that
which is towards it I call downward movement. (The view, urged by
some, that there is no up and no down in the heaven, is absurd. There
can be, they say, no up and no down, since the universe is similar
every way, and from any point on the earth's surface a man by advancing
far enough will come to stand foot to foot with himself. But the extremity
of the whole, which we call 'above', is in position above and in nature
primary. And since the universe has an extremity and a centre, it
must clearly have an up and down. Common usage is thus correct, though
inadequate. And the reason of its inadequacy is that men think that
the universe is not similar every way. They recognize only the hemisphere
which is over us. But if they went on to think of the world as formed
on this pattern all round, with a centre identically related to each
point on the extremity, they would have to admit that the extremity
was above and the centre below.) By absolutely light, then, we mean
that which moves upward or to the extremity, and by absolutely heavy
that which moves downward or to the centre. By lighter or relatively
light we mean that one, of two bodies endowed with weight and equal
in bulk, which is exceeded by the other in the speed of its natural
downward movement. 

Part 2

Those of our predecessors who have entered upon this inquiry have
for the most part spoken of light and heavy things only in the sense
in which one of two things both endowed with weight is said to be
the lighter. And this treatment they consider a sufficient analysis
also of the notions of absolute heaviness, to which their account
does not apply. This, however, will become clearer as we advance.
One use of the terms 'lighter' and 'heavier' is that which is set
forth in writing in the Timaeus, that the body which is composed of
the greater number of identical parts is relatively heavy, while that
which is composed of a smaller number is relatively light. As a larger
quantity of lead or of bronze is heavier than a smaller-and this holds
good of all homogeneous masses, the superior weight always depending
upon a numerical superiority of equal parts-in precisely the same
way, they assert, lead is heavier than wood. For all bodies, in spite
of the general opinion to the contrary, are composed of identical
parts and of a single material. But this analysis says nothing of
the absolutely heavy and light. The facts are that fire is always
light and moves upward, while earth and all earthy things move downwards
or towards the centre. It cannot then be the fewness of the triangles
(of which, in their view, all these bodies are composed) which disposes
fire to move upward. If it were, the greater the quantity of fire
the slower it would move, owing to the increase of weight due to the
increased number of triangles. But the palpable fact, on the contrary,
is that the greater the quantity, the lighter the mass is and the
quicker its upward movement: and, similarly, in the reverse movement
from above downward, the small mass will move quicker and the large
slower. Further, since to be lighter is to have fewer of these homogeneous
parts and to be heavier is to have more, and air, water, and fire
are composed of the same triangles, the only difference being in the
number of such parts, which must therefore explain any distinction
of relatively light and heavy between these bodies, it follows that
there must be a certain quantum of air which is heavier than water.
But the facts are directly opposed to this. The larger the quantity
of air the more readily it moves upward, and any portion of air without
exception will rise up out of the water. 

So much for one view of the distinction between light and heavy. To
others the analysis seems insufficient; and their views on the subject,
though they belong to an older generation than ours, have an air of
novelty. It is apparent that there are bodies which, when smaller
in bulk than others, yet exceed them in weight. It is therefore obviously
insufficient to say that bodies of equal weight are composed of an
equal number of primary parts: for that would give equality of bulk.
Those who maintain that the primary or atomic parts, of which bodies
endowed with weight are composed, are planes, cannot so speak without
absurdity; but those who regard them as solids are in a better position
to assert that of such bodies the larger is the heavier. But since
in composite bodies the weight obviously does not correspond in this
way to the bulk, the lesser bulk being often superior in weight (as,
for instance, if one be wool and the other bronze), there are some
who think and say that the cause is to be found elsewhere. The void,
they say, which is imprisoned in bodies, lightens them and sometimes
makes the larger body the lighter. The reason is that there is more
void. And this would also account for the fact that a body composed
of a number of solid parts equal to, or even smaller than, that of
another is sometimes larger in bulk than it. In short, generally and
in every case a body is relatively light when it contains a relatively
large amount of void. This is the way they put it themselves, but
their account requires an addition. Relative lightness must depend
not only on an excess of void, but also an a defect of solid: for
if the ratio of solid to void exceeds a certain proportion, the relative
lightness will disappear. Thus fire, they say, is the lightest of
things just for this reason that it has the most void. But it would
follow that a large mass of gold, as containing more void than a small
mass of fire, is lighter than it, unless it also contains many times
as much solid. The addition is therefore necessary. 

Of those who deny the existence of a void some, like Anaxagoras and
Empedocles, have not tried to analyse the notions of light and heavy
at all; and those who, while still denying the existence of a void,
have attempted this, have failed to explain why there are bodies which
are absolutely heavy and light, or in other words why some move upward
and others downward. The fact, again, that the body of greater bulk
is sometimes lighter than smaller bodies is one which they have passed
over in silence, and what they have said gives no obvious suggestion
for reconciling their views with the observed facts. 

But those who attribute the lightness of fire to its containing so
much void are necessarily involved in practically the same difficulties.
For though fire be supposed to contain less solid than any other body,
as well as more void, yet there will be a certain quantum of fire
in which the amount of solid or plenum is in excess of the solids
contained in some small quantity of earth. They may reply that there
is an excess of void also. But the question is, how will they discriminate
the absolutely heavy? Presumably, either by its excess of solid or
by its defect of void. On the former view there could be an amount
of earth so small as to contain less solid than a large mass of fire.
And similarly, if the distinction rests on the amount of void, there
will be a body, lighter than the absolutely light, which nevertheless
moves downward as constantly as the other moves upward. But that cannot
be so, since the absolutely light is always lighter than bodies which
have weight and move downward, while, on the other hand, that which
is lighter need not be light, because in common speech we distinguish
a lighter and a heavier (viz. water and earth) among bodies endowed
with weight. Again, the suggestion of a certain ratio between the
void and the solid in a body is no more equal to solving the problem
before us. The manner of speaking will issue in a similar impossibility.
For any two portions of fire, small or great, will exhibit the same
ratio of solid to void, but the upward movement of the greater is
quicker than that of the less, just as the downward movement of a
mass of gold or lead, or of any other body endowed with weight, is
quicker in proportion to its size. This, however, should not be the
case if the ratio is the ground of distinction between heavy things
and light. There is also an absurdity in attributing the upward movement
of bodies to a void which does not itself move. If, however, it is
the nature of a void to move upward and of a plenum to move downward,
and therefore each causes a like movement in other things, there was
no need to raise the question why composite bodies are some light
and some heavy; they had only to explain why these two things are
themselves light and heavy respectively, and to give, further, the
reason why the plenum and the void are not eternally separated. It
is also unreasonable to imagine a place for the void, as if the void
were not itself a kind of place. But if the void is to move, it must
have a place out of which and into which the change carries it. Also
what is the cause of its movement? Not, surely, its voidness: for
it is not the void only which is moved, but also the solid.

Similar difficulties are involved in all other methods of distinction,
whether they account for the relative lightness and heaviness of bodies
by distinctions of size, or proceed on any other principle, so long
as they attribute to each the same matter, or even if they recognize
more than one matter, so long as that means only a pair of contraries.
If there is a single matter, as with those who compose things of triangles,
nothing can be absolutely heavy or light: and if there is one matter
and its contrary-the void, for instance, and the plenum-no reason
can be given for the relative lightness and heaviness of the bodies
intermediate between the absolutely light and heavy when compared
either with one another or with these themselves. The view which bases
the distinction upon differences of size is more like a mere fiction
than those previously mentioned, but, in that it is able to make distinctions
between the four elements, it is in a stronger position for meeting
the foregoing difficulties. Since, however, it imagines that these
bodies which differ in size are all made of one substance, it implies,
equally with the view that there is but one matter, that there is
nothing absolutely light and nothing which moves upward (except as
being passed by other things or forced up by them); and since a multitude
of small atoms are heavier than a few large ones, it will follow that
much air or fire is heavier than a little water or earth, which is
impossible. 

Part 3

These, then, are the views which have been advanced by others and
the terms in which they state them. We may begin our own statement
by settling a question which to some has been the main difficulty-the
question why some bodies move always and naturally upward and others
downward, while others again move both upward and downward. After
that we will inquire into light and heavy and of the various phenomena
connected with them. The local movement of each body into its own
place must be regarded as similar to what happens in connexion with
other forms of generation and change. There are, in fact, three kinds
of movement, affecting respectively the size, the form, and the place
of a thing, and in each it is observable that change proceeds from
a contrary to a contrary or to something intermediate: it is never
the change of any chance subject in any chance direction, nor, similarly,
is the relation of the mover to its object fortuitous: the thing altered
is different from the thing increased, and precisely the same difference
holds between that which produces alteration and that which produces
increase. In the same manner it must be thought that produces local
motion and that which is so moved are not fortuitously related. Now,
that which produces upward and downward movement is that which produces
weight and lightness, and that which is moved is that which is potentially
heavy or light, and the movement of each body to its own place is
motion towards its own form. (It is best to interpret in this sense
the common statement of the older writers that 'like moves to like'.
For the words are not in every sense true to fact. If one were to
remove the earth to where the moon now is, the various fragments of
earth would each move not towards it but to the place in which it
now is. In general, when a number of similar and undifferentiated
bodies are moved with the same motion this result is necessarily produced,
viz. that the place which is the natural goal of the movement of each
single part is also that of the whole. But since the place of a thing
is the boundary of that which contains it, and the continent of all
things that move upward or downward is the extremity and the centre,
and this boundary comes to be, in a sense, the form of that which
is contained, it is to its like that a body moves when it moves to
its own place. For the successive members of the scries are like one
another: water, I mean, is like air and air like fire, and between
intermediates the relation may be converted, though not between them
and the extremes; thus air is like water, but water is like earth:
for the relation of each outer body to that which is next within it
is that of form to matter.) Thus to ask why fire moves upward and
earth downward is the same as to ask why the healable, when moved
and changed qua healable, attains health and not whiteness; and similar
questions might be asked concerning any other subject of aletion.
Of course the subject of increase, when changed qua increasable, attains
not health but a superior size. The same applies in the other cases.
One thing changes in quality, another in quantity: and so in place,
a light thing goes upward, a heavy thing downward. The only difference
is that in the last case, viz. that of the heavy and the light, the
bodies are thought to have a spring of change within themselves, while
the subjects of healing and increase are thought to be moved purely
from without. Sometimes, however, even they change of themselves,
ie. in response to a slight external movement reach health or increase,
as the case may be. And since the same thing which is healable is
also receptive of disease, it depends on whether it is moved qua healable
or qua liable to disease whether the motion is towards health or towards
disease. But the reason why the heavy and the light appear more than
these things to contain within themselves the source of their movements
is that their matter is nearest to being. This is indicated by the
fact that locomotion belongs to bodies only when isolated from other
bodies, and is generated last of the several kinds of movement; in
order of being then it will be first. Now whenever air comes into
being out of water, light out of heavy, it goes to the upper place.
It is forthwith light: becoming is at an end, and in that place it
has being. Obviously, then, it is a potentiality, which, in its passage
to actuality, comes into that place and quantity and quality which
belong to its actuality. And the same fact explains why what is already
actually fire or earth moves, when nothing obstructs it, towards its
own place. For motion is equally immediate in the case of nutriment,
when nothing hinders, and in the case of the thing healed, when nothing
stays the healing. But the movement is also due to the original creative
force and to that which removes the hindrance or off which the moving
thing rebounded, as was explained in our opening discussions, where
we tried to show how none of these things moves itself. The reason
of the various motions of the various bodies, and the meaning of the
motion of a body to its own place, have now been explained.

Part 4

We have now to speak of the distinctive properties of these bodies
and of the various phenomena connected with them. In accordance with
general conviction we may distinguish the absolutely heavy, as that
which sinks to the bottom of all things, from the absolutely light,
which is that which rises to the surface of all things. I use the
term 'absolutely', in view of the generic character of 'light' and
'heavy', in order to confine the application to bodies which do not
combine lightness and heaviness. It is apparent, I mean, that fire,
in whatever quantity, so long as there is no external obstacle moves
upward, and earth downward; and, if the quantity is increased, the
movement is the same, though swifter. But the heaviness and lightness
of bodies which combine these qualities is different from this, since
while they rise to the surface of some bodies they sink to the bottom
of others. Such are air and water. Neither of them is absolutely either
light or heavy. Both are lighter than earth-for any portion of either
rises to the surface of it-but heavier than fire, since a portion
of either, whatever its quantity, sinks to the bottom of fire; compared
together, however, the one has absolute weight, the other absolute
lightness, since air in any quantity rises to the surface of water,
while water in any quantity sinks to the bottom of air. Now other
bodies are severally light and heavy, and evidently in them the attributes
are due to the difference of their uncompounded parts: that is to
say, according as the one or the other happens to preponderate the
bodies will be heavy and light respectively. Therefore we need only
speak of these parts, since they are primary and all else consequential:
and in so doing we shall be following the advice which we gave to
those whose attribute heaviness to the presence of plenum and lightness
to that of void. It is due to the properties of the elementary bodies
that a body which is regarded as light in one place is regarded as
heavy in another, and vice versa. In air, for instance, a talent's
weight of wood is heavier than a mina of lead, but in water the wood
is the lighter. The reason is that all the elements except fire have
weight and all but earth lightness. Earth, then, and bodies in which
earth preponderates, must needs have weight everywhere, while water
is heavy anywhere but in earth, and air is heavy when not in water
or earth. In its own place each of these bodies has weight except
fire, even air. Of this we have evidence in the fact that a bladder
when inflated weighs more than when empty. A body, then, in which
air preponderates over earth and water, may well be lighter than something
in water and yet heavier than it in air, since such a body does not
rise in air but rises to the surface in water. 

The following account will make it plain that there is an absolutely
light and an absolutely heavy body. And by absolutely light I mean
one which of its own nature always moves upward, by absolutely heavy
one which of its own nature always moves downward, if no obstacle
is in the way. There are, I say, these two kinds of body, and it is
not the case, as some maintain, that all bodies have weight. Different
views are in fact agreed that there is a heavy body, which moves uniformly
towards the centre. But is also similarly a light body. For we see
with our eyes, as we said before, that earthy things sink to the bottom
of all things and move towards the centre. But the centre is a fixed
point. If therefore there is some body which rises to the surface
of all things-and we observe fire to move upward even in air itself,
while the air remains at rest-clearly this body is moving towards
the extremity. It cannot then have any weight. If it had, there would
be another body in which it sank: and if that had weight, there would
be yet another which moved to the extremity and thus rose to the surface
of all moving things. In fact, however, we have no evidence of such
a body. Fire, then, has no weight. Neither has earth any lightness,
since it sinks to the bottom of all things, and that which sinks moves
to the centre. That there is a centre towards which the motion of
heavy things, and away from which that of light things is directed,
is manifest in many ways. First, because no movement can continue
to infinity. For what cannot be can no more come-to-be than be, and
movement is a coming to-be in one place from another. Secondly, like
the upward movement of fire, the downward movement of earth and all
heavy things makes equal angles on every side with the earth's surface:
it must therefore be directed towards the centre. Whether it is really
the centre of the earth and not rather that of the whole to which
it moves, may be left to another inquiry, since these are coincident.
But since that which sinks to the bottom of all things moves to the
centre, necessarily that which rises to the surface moves to the extremity
of the region in which the movement of these bodies takes place. For
the centre is opposed as contrary to the extremity, as that which
sinks is opposed to that which rises to the surface. This also gives
a reasonable ground for the duality of heavy and light in the spatial
duality centre and extremity. Now there is also the intermediate region
to which each name is given in opposition to the other extreme. For
that which is intermediate between the two is in a sense both extremity
and centre. For this reason there is another heavy and light; namely,
water and air. But in our view the continent pertains to form and
the contained to matter: and this distinction is present in every
genus. Alike in the sphere of quality and in that of quantity there
is that which corresponds rather to form and that which corresponds
to matter. In the same way, among spatial distinctions, the above
belongs to the determinate, the below to matter. The same holds, consequently,
also of the matter itself of that which is heavy and light: as potentially
possessing the one character, it is matter for the heavy, and as potentially
possessing the other, for the light. It is the same matter, but its
being is different, as that which is receptive of disease is the same
as that which is receptive of health, though in being different from
it, and therefore diseasedness is different from healthiness.

Part 5

A thing then which has the one kind of matter is light and always
moves upward, while a thing which has the opposite matter is heavy
and always moves downward. Bodies composed of kinds of matter different
from these but having relatively to each other the character which
these have absolutely, possess both the upward and the downward motion.
Hence air and water each have both lightness and weight, and water
sinks to the bottom of all things except earth, while air rises to
the surface of all things except fire. But since there is one body
only which rises to the surface of all things and one only which sinks
to the bottom of all things, there must needs be two other bodies
which sink in some bodies and rise to the surface of others. The kinds
of matter, then, must be as numerous as these bodies, i.e. four, but
though they are four there must be a common matter of all-particularly
if they pass into one another-which in each is in being different.
There is no reason why there should not be one or more intermediates
between the contraries, as in the case of colour; for 'intermediate'
and 'mean' are capable of more than one application. 

Now in its own place every body endowed with both weight and lightness
has weightwhereas earth has weight everywhere-but they only have lightness
among bodies to whose surface they rise. Hence when a support is withdrawn
such a body moves downward until it reaches the body next below it,
air to the place of water and water to that of earth. But if the fire
above air is removed, it will not move upward to the place of fire,
except by constraint; and in that way water also may be drawn up,
when the upward movement of air which has had a common surface with
it is swift enough to overpower the downward impulse of the water.
Nor does water move upward to the place of air, except in the manner
just described. Earth is not so affected at all, because a common
surface is not possible to it. Hence water is drawn up into the vessel
to which fire is applied, but not earth. As earth fails to move upward,
so fire fails to move downward when air is withdrawn from beneath
it: for fire has no weight even in its own place, as earth has no
lightness. The other two move downward when the body beneath is withdrawn
because, while the absolutely heavy is that which sinks to the bottom
of all things, the relatively heavy sinks to its own place or to the
surface of the body in which it rises, since it is similar in matter
to it. 

It is plain that one must suppose as many distinct species of matter
as there are bodies. For if, first, there is a single matter of all
things, as, for instance, the void or the plenum or extension or the
triangles, either all things will move upward or all things will move
downward, and the second motion will be abolished. And so, either
there will be no absolutely light body, if superiority of weight is
due to superior size or number of the constituent bodies or to the
fullness of the body: but the contrary is a matter of observation,
and it has been shown that the downward and upward movements are equally
constant and universal: or, if the matter in question is the void
or something similar, which moves uniformly upward, there will be
nothing to move uniformly downward. Further, it will follow that the
intermediate bodies move downward in some cases quicker than earth:
for air in sufficiently large quantity will contain a larger number
of triangles or solids or particles. It is, however, manifest that
no portion of air whatever moves downward. And the same reasoning
applies to lightness, if that is supposed to depend on superiority
of quantity of matter. But if, secondly, the kinds of matter are two,
it will be difficult to make the intermediate bodies behave as air
and water behave. Suppose, for example, that the two asserted are
void and plenum. Fire, then, as moving upward, will be void, earth,
as moving downward, plenum; and in air, it will be said, fire preponderates,
in water, earth. There will then be a quantity of water containing
more fire than a little air, and a large amount of air will contain
more earth than a little water: consequently we shall have to say
that air in a certain quantity moves downward more quickly than a
little water. But such a thing has never been observed anywhere. Necessarily,
then, as fire goes up because it has something, e.g. void, which other
things do not have, and earth goes downward because it has plenum,
so air goes to its own place above water because it has something
else, and water goes downward because of some special kind of body.
But if the two bodies are one matter, or two matters both present
in each, there will be a certain quantity of each at which water will
excel a little air in the upward movement and air excel water in the
downward movement, as we have already often said. 

Part 6

The shape of bodies will not account for their moving upward or downward
in general, though it will account for their moving faster or slower.
The reasons for this are not difficult to see. For the problem thus
raised is why a flat piece of iron or lead floats upon water, while
smaller and less heavy things, so long as they are round or long-a
needle, for instance-sink down; and sometimes a thing floats because
it is small, as with gold dust and the various earthy and dusty materials
which throng the air. With regard to these questions, it is wrong
to accept the explanation offered by Democritus. He says that the
warm bodies moving up out of the water hold up heavy bodies which
are broad, while the narrow ones fall through, because the bodies
which offer this resistance are not numerous. But this would be even
more likely to happen in air-an objection which he himself raises.
His reply to the objection is feeble. In the air, he says, the 'drive'
(meaning by drive the movement of the upward moving bodies) is not
uniform in direction. But since some continua are easily divided and
others less easily, and things which produce division differ similarly
in the case with which they produce it, the explanation must be found
in this fact. It is the easily bounded, in proportion as it is easily
bounded, which is easily divided; and air is more so than water, water
than earth. Further, the smaller the quantity in each kind, the more
easily it is divided and disrupted. Thus the reason why broad things
keep their place is because they cover so wide a surface and the greater
quantity is less easily disrupted. Bodies of the opposite shape sink
down because they occupy so little of the surface, which is therefore
easily parted. And these considerations apply with far greater force
to air, since it is so much more easily divided than water. But since
there are two factors, the force responsible for the downward motion
of the heavy body and the disruption-resisting force of the continuous
surface, there must be some ratio between the two. For in proportion
as the force applied by the heavy thing towards disruption and division
exceeds that which resides in the continuum, the quicker will it force
its way down; only if the force of the heavy thing is the weaker,
will it ride upon the surface. 

We have now finished our examination of the heavy and the light and
of the phenomena connected with them. 

THE END

Part 1

The reasons for some animals being long-lived and others short-lived,
and, in a word, causes of the length and brevity of life call for
investigation. 

The necessary beginning to our inquiry is a statement of the difficulties
about these points. For it is not clear whether in animals and plants
universally it is a single or diverse cause that makes some to be
long-lived, others short-lived. Plants too have in some cases a long
life, while in others it lasts but for a year. 

Further, in a natural structure are longevity and a sound constitution
coincident, or is shortness of life independent of unhealthiness?
Perhaps in the case of certain maladies a diseased state of the body
and shortness of life are interchangeable, while in the case of others
ill-health is perfectly compatible with long life. 

Of sleep and waking we have already treated; about life and death
we shall speak later on, and likewise about health and disease, in
so far as it belongs to the science of nature to do so. But at present
we have to investigate the causes of some creatures being long-lived,
and others short-lived. We find this distinction affecting not only
entire genera opposed as wholes to one another, but applying also
to contrasted sets of individuals within the same species. As an instance
of the difference applying to the genus I give man and horse (for
mankind has a longer life than the horse), while within the species
there is the difference between man and man; for of men also some
are long-lived, others short-lived, differing from each other in respect
of the different regions in which they dwell. Races inhabiting warm
countries have longer life, those living in a cold climate live a
shorter time. Likewise there are similar differences among individuals
occupying the same locality. 

Part 2

In order to find premisses for our argument, we must answer the question,
What is that which, in natural objects, makes them easily destroyed,
or the reverse? Since fire and water, and whatsoever is akin thereto,
do not possess identical powers they are reciprocal causes of generation
and decay. Hence it is natural to infer that everything else arising
from them and composed of them should share in the same nature, in
all cases where things are not, like a house, a composite unity formed
by the synthesis of many things. 

In other matters a different account must be given; for in many things
their mode of dissolution is something peculiar to themselves, e.g.
in knowledge and health and disease. These pass away even though the
medium in which they are found is not destroyed but continues to exist;
for example, take the termination of ignorance, which is recollection
or learning, while knowledge passes away into forgetfulness, or error.
But accidentally the disintegration of a natural object is accompanied
by the destruction of the non-physical reality; for, when the animal
dies, the health or knowledge resident in it passes away too. Hence
from these considerations we may draw a conclusion about the soul
too; for, if the inherence of soul in body is not a matter of nature
but like that of knowledge in the soul, there would be another mode
of dissolution pertaining to it besides that which occurs when the
body is destroyed. But since evidently it does not admit of this dual
dissolution, the soul must stand in a different case in respect of
its union with the body. 

Part 3

Perhaps one might reasonably raise the question whether there is any
place where what is corruptible becomes incorruptible, as fire does
in the upper regions where it meets with no opposite. Opposites destroy
each other, and hence accidentally, by their destruction, whatsoever
is attributed to them is destroyed. But no opposite in a real substance
is accidentally destroyed, because real substance is not predicated
of any subject. Hence a thing which has no opposite, or which is situated
where it has no opposite, cannot be destroyed. For what will that
be which can destroy it, if destruction comes only through contraries,
but no contrary to it exists either absolutely or in the particular
place where it is? But perhaps this is in one sense true, in another
sense not true, for it is impossible that anything containing matter
should not have in any sense an opposite. Heat and straightness can
be present in every part of a thing, but it is impossible that the
thing should be nothing but hot or white or straight; for, if that
were so, attributes would have an independent existence. Hence if,
in all cases, whenever the active and the passive exist together,
the one acts and the other is acted on, it is impossible that no change
should occur. Further, this is so if a waste product is an opposite,
and waste must always be produced; for opposition is always the source
of change, and refuse is what remains of the previous opposite. But,
after expelling everything of a nature actually opposed, would an
object in this case also be imperishable? No, it would be destroyed
by the environment. 

If then that is so, what we have said sufficiently accounts for the
change; but, if not, we must assume that something of actually opposite
character is in the changing object, and refuse is produced.

Hence accidentally a lesser flame is consumed by a greater one, for
the nutriment, to wit the smoke, which the former takes a long period
to expend, is used up by the big flame quickly. 

Hence [too] all things are at all times in a state of transition and
are coming into being and passing away. The environment acts on them
either favourably or antagonistically, and, owing to this, things
that change their situation become more or less enduring than their
nature warrants, but never are they eternal when they contain contrary
qualities; for their matter is an immediate source of contrariety,
so that if it involves locality they show change of situation, if
quantity, increase and diminution, while if it involves qualitative
affection we find alteration of character. 

Part 4

We find that a superior immunity from decay attaches neither to the
largest animals (the horse has shorter life than man) nor to those
that are small (for most insects live but for a year). Nor are plants
as a whole less liable to perish than animals (many plants are annuals),
nor have sanguineous animals the pre-eminence (for the bee is longer-lived
than certain sanguineous animals). Neither is it the bloodless animals
that live longest (for molluscs live only a year, though bloodless),
nor terrestrial organisms (there are both plants and terrestrial animals
of which a single year is the period), nor the occupants of the sea
(for there we find the crustaceans and the molluscs, which are short-lived).

Speaking generally, the longest-lived things occur among the plants,
e.g. the date-palm. Next in order we find them among the sanguineous
animals rather than among the bloodless, and among those with feet
rather than among the denizens of the water. Hence, taking these two
characters together, the longest-lived animals fall among sanguineous
animals which have feet, e.g. man and elephant. As a matter of fact
also it is a general rule that the larger live longer than the smaller,
for the other long-lived animals too happen to be of a large size,
as are also those I have mentioned. 

Part 5

The following considerations may enable us to understand the reasons
for all these facts. We must remember that an animal is by nature
humid and warm, and to live is to be of such a constitution, while
old age is dry and cold, and so is a corpse. This is plain to observation.
But the material constituting the bodies of all things consists of
the following-the hot and the cold, the dry and the moist. Hence when
they age they must become dry, and therefore the fluid in them requires
to be not easily dried up. Thus we explain why fat things are not
liable to decay. The reason is that they contain air; now air relatively
to the other elements is fire, and fire never becomes corrupted.

Again the humid element in animals must not be small in quantity,
for a small quantity is easily dried up. This is why both plants and
animals that are large are, as a general rule, longer-lived than the
rest, as was said before; it is to be expected that the larger should
contain more moisture. But it is not merely this that makes them longer
lived; for the cause is twofold, to wit, the quality as well as the
quantity of the fluid. Hence the moisture must be not only great in
amount but also warm, in order to be neither easily congealed nor
easily dried up. 

It is for this reason also that man lives longer than some animals
which are larger; for animals live longer though there is a deficiency
in the amount of their moisture, if the ratio of its qualitative superiority
exceeds that of its quantitative deficiency. 

In some creatures the warm element is their fatty substance, which
prevents at once desiccation and congelation; but in others it assumes
a different flavour. Further, that which is designed to be not easily
destroyed should not yield waste products. Anything of such a nature
causes death either by disease or naturally, for the potency of the
waste product works adversely and destroys now the entire constitution,
now a particular member. 

This is why salacious animals and those abounding in seed age quickly;
the seed is a residue, and further, by being lost, it produces dryness.
Hence the mule lives longer than either the horse or the ass from
which it sprang, and females live longer than males if the males are
salacious. Accordingly cock-sparrows have a shorter life than the
females. Again males subject to great toil are short-lived and age
more quickly owing to the labour; toil produces dryness and old age
is dry. But by natural constitution and as a general rule males live
longer than females, and the reason is that the male is an animal
with more warmth than the female. 

The same kind of animals are longer-lived in warm than in cold climates
for the same reason, on account of which they are of larger size.
The size of animals of cold constitution illustrates this particularly
well, and hence snakes and lizards and scaly reptiles are of great
size in warm localities, as also are testacea in the Red Sea: the
warm humidity there is the cause equally of their augmented size and
of their life. But in cold countries the humidity in animals is more
of a watery nature, and hence is readily congealed. Consequently it
happens that animals with little or no blood are in northerly regions
either entirely absent (both the land animals with feet and the water
creatures whose home is the sea) or, when they do occur, they are
smaller and have shorter life; for the frost prevents growth.

Both plants and animals perish if not fed, for in that case they consume
themselves; just as a large flame consumes and burns up a small one
by using up its nutriment, so the natural warmth which is the primary
cause of digestion consumes the material in which it is located.

Water animals have a shorter life than terrestrial creatures, not
strictly because they are humid, but because they are watery, and
watery moisture is easily destroyed, since it is cold and readily
congealed. For the same reason bloodless animals perish readily unless
protected by great size, for there is neither fatness nor sweetness
about them. In animals fat is sweet, and hence bees are longer-lived
than other animals of larger size. 

Part 6

It is amongst the plants that we find the longest life-more than among
the animals, for, in the first place, they are less watery and hence
less easily frozen. Further they have an oiliness and a viscosity
which makes them retain their moisture in a form not easily dried
up, even though they are dry and earthy. 

But we must discover the reason why trees are of an enduring constitution,
for it is peculiar to them and is not found in any animals except
the insects. 

Plants continually renew themselves and hence last for a long time.
New shoots continually come and the others grow old, and with the
roots the same thing happens. But both processes do not occur together.
Rather it happens that at one time the trunk and the branches alone
die and new ones grow up beside them, and it is only when this has
taken place that the fresh roots spring from the surviving part. Thus
it continues, one part dying and the other growing, and hence also
it lives a long time. 

There is a similarity, as has been already said, between plants and
insects, for they live, though divided, and two or more may be derived
from a single one. Insects, however, though managing to live, are
not able to do so long, for they do not possess organs; nor can the
principle resident in each of the separated parts create organs. In
the case of a plant, however, it can do so; every part of a plant
contains potentially both root and stem. Hence it is from this source
that issues that continued growth when one part is renewed and the
other grows old; it is practically a case of longevity. The taking
of slips furnishes a similar instance, for we might say that, in a
way, when we take a slip the same thing happens; the shoot cut off
is part of the plant. Thus in taking slips this perpetuation of life
occurs though their connexion with the plant is severed, but in the
former case it is the continuity that is operative. The reason is
that the life principle potentially belonging to them is present in
every part. 

Identical phenomena are found both in plants and in animals. For in
animals the males are, in general, the longer-lived. They have their
upper parts larger than the lower (the male is more of the dwarf type
of build than the female), and it is in the upper part that warmth
resides, in the lower cold. In plants also those with great heads
are longer-lived, and such are those that are not annual but of the
tree-type, for the roots are the head and upper part of a plant, and
among the annuals growth occurs in the direction of their lower parts
and the fruit. 

These matters however will be specially investigated in the work On
Plants. But this is our account of the reasons for the duration of
life and for short life in animals. It remains for us to discuss youth
and age, and life and death. To come to a definite understanding about
these matters would complete our course of study on animals.

THE END

Part 1

We have, in the next place, to treat of Memory and Remembering, considering
its nature, its cause, and the part of the soul to which this experience,
as well as that of Recollecting, belongs. For the persons who possess
a retentive memory are not identical with those who excel in power
of recollection; indeed, as a rule, slow people have a good memory,
whereas those who are quick-witted and clever are better at recollecting.

We must first form a true conception of these objects of memory, a
point on which mistakes are often made. Now to remember the future
is not possible, but this is an object of opinion or expectation (and
indeed there might be actually a science of expectation, like that
of divination, in which some believe); nor is there memory of the
present, but only sense-perception. For by the latter we know not
the future, nor the past, but the present only. But memory relates
to the past. No one would say that he remembers the present, when
it is present, e.g. a given white object at the moment when he sees
it; nor would one say that he remembers an object of scientific contemplation
at the moment when he is actually contemplating it, and has it full
before his mind;-of the former he would say only that he perceives
it, of the latter only that he knows it. But when one has scientific
knowledge, or perception, apart from the actualizations of the faculty
concerned, he thus 'remembers' (that the angles of a triangle are
together equal to two right angles); as to the former, that he learned
it, or thought it out for himself, as to the latter, that he heard,
or saw, it, or had some such sensible experience of it. For whenever
one exercises the faculty of remembering, he must say within himself,
'I formerly heard (or otherwise perceived) this,' or 'I formerly had
this thought'. 

Memory is, therefore, neither Perception nor Conception, but a state
or affection of one of these, conditioned by lapse of time. As already
observed, there is no such thing as memory of the present while present,
for the present is object only of perception, and the future, of expectation,
but the object of memory is the past. All memory, therefore, implies
a time elapsed; consequently only those animals which perceive time
remember, and the organ whereby they perceive time is also that whereby
they remember. 

The subject of 'presentation' has been already considered in our work
On the Soul. Without a presentation intellectual activity is impossible.
For there is in such activity an incidental affection identical with
one also incidental in geometrical demonstrations. For in the latter
case, though we do not for the purpose of the proof make any use of
the fact that the quantity in the triangle (for example, which we
have drawn) is determinate, we nevertheless draw it determinate in
quantity. So likewise when one exerts the intellect (e.g. on the subject
of first principles), although the object may not be quantitative,
one envisages it as quantitative, though he thinks it in abstraction
from quantity; while, on the other hand, if the object of the intellect
is essentially of the class of things that are quantitative, but indeterminate,
one envisages it as if it had determinate quantity, though subsequently,
in thinking it, he abstracts from its determinateness. Why we cannot
exercise the intellect on any object absolutely apart from the continuous,
or apply it even to non-temporal things unless in connexion with time,
is another question. Now, one must cognize magnitude and motion by
means of the same faculty by which one cognizes time (i.e. by that
which is also the faculty of memory), and the presentation (involved
in such cognition) is an affection of the sensus communis; whence
this follows, viz. that the cognition of these objects (magnitude,
motion time) is effected by the (said sensus communis, i.e. the) primary
faculty of perception. Accordingly, memory (not merely of sensible,
but) even of intellectual objects involves a presentation: hence we
may conclude that it belongs to the faculty of intelligence only incidentally,
while directly and essentially it belongs to the primary faculty of
sense-perception. 

Hence not only human beings and the beings which possess opinion or
intelligence, but also certain other animals, possess memory. If memory
were a function of (pure) intellect, it would not have been as it
is an attribute of many of the lower animals, but probably, in that
case, no mortal beings would have had memory; since, even as the case
stands, it is not an attribute of them all, just because all have
not the faculty of perceiving time. Whenever one actually remembers
having seen or heard, or learned, something, he includes in this act
(as we have already observed) the consciousness of 'formerly'; and
the distinction of 'former' and 'latter' is a distinction in time.

Accordingly if asked, of which among the parts of the soul memory
is a function, we reply: manifestly of that part to which 'presentation'
appertains; and all objects capable of being presented (viz. aistheta)
are immediately and properly objects of memory, while those (viz.
noeta) which necessarily involve (but only involve) presentation are
objects of memory incidentally. 

One might ask how it is possible that though the affection (the presentation)
alone is present, and the (related) fact absent, the latter-that which
is not present-is remembered. (The question arises), because it is
clear that we must conceive that which is generated through sense-perception
in the sentient soul, and in the part of the body which is its seat-viz.
that affection the state whereof we call memory-to be some such thing
as a picture. The process of movement (sensory stimulation) involved
the act of perception stamps in, as it were, a sort of impression
of the percept, just as persons do who make an impression with a seal.
This explains why, in those who are strongly moved owing to passion,
or time of life, no mnemonic impression is formed; just as no impression
would be formed if the movement of the seal were to impinge on running
water; while there are others in whom, owing to the receiving surface
being frayed, as happens to (the stucco on) old (chamber) walls, or
owing to the hardness of the receiving surface, the requisite impression
is not implanted at all. Hence both very young and very old persons
are defective in memory; they are in a state of flux, the former because
of their growth, the latter, owing to their decay. In like manner,
also, both those who are too quick and those who are too slow have
bad memories. The former are too soft, the latter too hard (in the
texture of their receiving organs), so that in the case of the former
the presented image (though imprinted) does not remain in the soul,
while on the latter it is not imprinted at all. 

But then, if this truly describes what happens in the genesis of memory,
(the question stated above arises:) when one remembers, is it this
impressed affection that he remembers, or is it the objective thing
from which this was derived? If the former, it would follow that we
remember nothing which is absent; if the latter, how is it possible
that, though perceiving directly only the impression, we remember
that absent thing which we do not perceive? Granted that there is
in us something like an impression or picture, why should the perception
of the mere impression be memory of something else, instead of being
related to this impression alone? For when one actually remembers,
this impression is what he contemplates, and this is what he perceives.
How then does he remember what is not present? One might as well suppose
it possible also to see or hear that which is not present. In reply,
we suggest that this very thing is quite conceivable, nay, actually
occurs in experience. A picture painted on a panel is at once a picture
and a likeness: that is, while one and the same, it is both of these,
although the 'being' of both is not the same, and one may contemplate
it either as a picture, or as a likeness. Just in the same way we
have to conceive that the mnemonic presentation within us is something
which by itself is merely an object of contemplation, while, in-relation
to something else, it is also a presentation of that other thing.
In so far as it is regarded in itself, it is only an object of contemplation,
or a presentation; but when considered as relative to something else,
e.g. as its likeness, it is also a mnemonic token. Hence, whenever
the residual sensory process implied by it is actualized in consciousness,
if the soul perceives this in so far as it is something absolute,
it appears to occur as a mere thought or presentation; but if the
soul perceives it qua related to something else, then,-just as when
one contemplates the painting in the picture as being a likeness,
and without having (at the moment) seen the actual Koriskos, contemplates
it as a likeness of Koriskos, and in that case the experience involved
in this contemplation of it (as relative) is different from what one
has when he contemplates it simply as a painted figure-(so in the
case of memory we have the analogous difference for), of the objects
in the soul, the one (the unrelated object) presents itself simply
as a thought, but the other (the related object) just because, as
in the painting, it is a likeness, presents itself as a mnemonic token.

We can now understand why it is that sometimes, when we have such
processes, based on some former act of perception, occurring in the
soul, we do not know whether this really implies our having had perceptions
corresponding to them, and we doubt whether the case is or is not
one of memory. But occasionally it happens that (while thus doubting)
we get a sudden idea and recollect that we heard or saw something
formerly. This (occurrence of the 'sudden idea') happens whenever,
from contemplating a mental object as absolute, one changes his point
of view, and regards it as relative to something else. 

The opposite (sc. to the case of those who at first do not recognize
their phantasms as mnemonic) also occurs, as happened in the cases
of Antipheron of Oreus and others suffering from mental derangement;
for they were accustomed to speak of their mere phantasms as facts
of their past experience, and as if remembering them. This takes place
whenever one contemplates what is not a likeness as if it were a likeness.

Mnemonic exercises aim at preserving one's memory of something by
repeatedly reminding him of it; which implies nothing else (on the
learner's part) than the frequent contemplation of something (viz.
the 'mnemonic', whatever it may be) as a likeness, and not as out
of relation. 

As regards the question, therefore, what memory or remembering is,
it has now been shown that it is the state of a presentation, related
as a likeness to that of which it is a presentation; and as to the
question of which of the faculties within us memory is a function,
(it has been shown) that it is a function of the primary faculty of
sense-perception, i.e. of that faculty whereby we perceive time.

Part 2

Next comes the subject of Recollection, in dealing with which we must
assume as fundamental the truths elicited above in our introductory
discussions. For recollection is not the 'recovery' or 'acquisition'
of memory; since at the instant when one at first learns (a fact of
science) or experiences (a particular fact of sense), he does not
thereby 'recover' a memory, inasmuch as none has preceded, nor does
he acquire one ab initio. It is only at the instant when the aforesaid
state or affection (of the aisthesis or upolepsis) is implanted in
the soul that memory exists, and therefore memory is not itself implanted
concurrently with the continuous implantation of the (original) sensory
experience. 

Further: at the very individual and concluding instant when first
(the sensory experience or scientific knowledge) has been completely
implanted, there is then already established in the person affected
the (sensory) affection, or the scientific knowledge (if one ought
to apply the term 'scientific knowledge' to the (mnemonic) state or
affection; and indeed one may well remember, in the 'incidental' sense,
some of the things (i.e. ta katholou) which are properly objects of
scientific knowledge); but to remember, strictly and properly speaking,
is an activity which will not be immanent until the original experience
has undergone lapse of time. For one remembers now what one saw or
otherwise experienced formerly; the moment of the original experience
and the moment of the memory of it are never identical. 

Again, (even when time has elapsed, and one can be said really to
have acquired memory, this is not necessarily recollection, for firstly)
it is obviously possible, without any present act of recollection,
to remember as a continued consequence of the original perception
or other experience; whereas when (after an interval of obliviscence)
one recovers some scientific knowledge which he had before, or some
perception, or some other experience, the state of which we above
declared to be memory, it is then, and then only, that this recovery
may amount to a recollection of any of the things aforesaid. But,
(though as observed above, remembering does not necessarily imply
recollecting), recollecting always implies remembering, and actualized
memory follows (upon the successful act of recollecting).

But secondly, even the assertion that recollection is the reinstatement
in consciousness of something which was there before but had disappeared
requires qualification. This assertion may be true, but it may also
be false; for the same person may twice learn (from some teacher),
or twice discover (i.e. excogitate), the same fact. Accordingly, the
act of recollecting ought (in its definition) to be distinguished
from these acts; i.e. recollecting must imply in those who recollect
the presence of some spring over and above that from which they originally
learn. 

Acts of recollection, as they occur in experience, are due to the
fact that one movement has by nature another that succeeds it in regular
order. 

If this order be necessary, whenever a subject experiences the former
of two movements thus connected, it will (invariably) experience the
latter; if, however, the order be not necessary, but customary, only
in the majority of cases will the subject experience the latter of
the two movements. But it is a fact that there are some movements,
by a single experience of which persons take the impress of custom
more deeply than they do by experiencing others many times; hence
upon seeing some things but once we remember them better than others
which we may have been frequently. 

Whenever therefore, we are recollecting, we are experiencing certain
of the antecedent movements until finally we experience the one after
which customarily comes that which we seek. This explains why we hunt
up the series (of kineseis) having started in thought either from
a present intuition or some other, and from something either similar,
or contrary, to what we seek, or else from that which is contiguous
with it. Such is the empirical ground of the process of recollection;
for the mnemonic movements involved in these starting-points are in
some cases identical, in others, again, simultaneous, with those of
the idea we seek, while in others they comprise a portion of them,
so that the remnant which one experienced after that portion (and
which still requires to be excited in memory) is comparatively small.

Thus, then, it is that persons seek to recollect, and thus, too, it
is that they recollect even without the effort of seeking to do so,
viz. when the movement implied in recollection has supervened on some
other which is its condition. For, as a rule, it is when antecedent
movements of the classes here described have first been excited, that
the particular movement implied in recollection follows. We need not
examine a series of which the beginning and end lie far apart, in
order to see how (by recollection) we remember; one in which they
lie near one another will serve equally well. For it is clear that
the method is in each case the same, that is, one hunts up the objective
series, without any previous search or previous recollection. For
(there is, besides the natural order, viz. the order of the pralmata,
or events of the primary experience, also a customary order, and)
by the effect of custom the mnemonic movements tend to succeed one
another in a certain order. Accordingly, therefore, when one wishes
to recollect, this is what he will do: he will try to obtain a beginning
of movement whose sequel shall be the movement which he desires to
reawaken. This explains why attempts at recollection succeed soonest
and best when they start from a beginning (of some objective series).
For, in order of succession, the mnemonic movements are to one another
as the objective facts (from which they are derived). Accordingly,
things arranged in a fixed order, like the successive demonstrations
in geometry, are easy to remember (or recollect) while badly arranged
subjects are remembered with difficulty. 

Recollecting differs also in this respect from relearning, that one
who recollects will be able, somehow, to move, solely by his own effort,
to the term next after the starting-point. When one cannot do this
of himself, but only by external assistance, he no longer remembers
(i.e. he has totally forgotten, and therefore of course cannot recollect).
It often happens that, though a person cannot recollect at the moment,
yet by seeking he can do so, and discovers what he seeks. This he
succeeds in doing by setting up many movements, until finally he excites
one of a kind which will have for its sequel the fact he wishes to
recollect. For remembering (which is the condicio sine qua non of
recollecting) is the existence, potentially, in the mind of a movement
capable of stimulating it to the desired movement, and this, as has
been said, in such a way that the person should be moved (prompted
to recollection) from within himself, i.e. in consequence of movements
wholly contained within himself. 

But one must get hold of a starting-point. This explains why it is
that persons are supposed to recollect sometimes by starting from
mnemonic loci. The cause is that they pass swiftly in thought from
one point to another, e.g. from milk to white, from white to mist,
and thence to moist, from which one remembers Autumn (the 'season
of mists'), if this be the season he is trying to recollect.

It seems true in general that the middle point also among all things
is a good mnemonic starting-point from which to reach any of them.
For if one does not recollect before, he will do so when he has come
to this, or, if not, nothing can help him; as, e.g. if one were to
have in mind the numerical series denoted by the symbols A, B, G,
D, E, Z, I, H, O. For, if he does not remember what he wants at E,
then at E he remembers O; because from E movement in either direction
is possible, to D or to Z. But, if it is not for one of these that
he is searching, he will remember (what he is searching for) when
he has come to G if he is searching for H or I. But if (it is) not
(for H or I that he is searching, but for one of the terms that remain),
he will remember by going to A, and so in all cases (in which one
starts from a middle point). The cause of one's sometimes recollecting
and sometimes not, though starting from the same point, is, that from
the same starting-point a movement can be made in several directions,
as, for instance, from G to I or to D. If, then, the mind has not
(when starting from E) moved in an old path (i.e. one in which it
moved first having the objective experience, and that, therefore,
in which un-'ethized' phusis would have it again move), it tends to
move to the more customary; for (the mind having, by chance or otherwise,
missed moving in the 'old' way) Custom now assumes the role of Nature.
Hence the rapidity with which we recollect what we frequently think
about. For as regular sequence of events is in accordance with nature,
so, too, regular sequence is observed in the actualization of kinesis
(in consciousness), and here frequency tends to produce (the regularity
of) nature. And since in the realm of nature occurrences take place
which are even contrary to nature, or fortuitous, the same happens
a fortiori in the sphere swayed by custom, since in this sphere natural
law is not similarly established. Hence it is that (from the same
starting-point) the mind receives an impulse to move sometimes in
the required direction, and at other times otherwise, (doing the latter)
particularly when something else somehow deflects the mind from the
right direction and attracts it to itself. This last consideration
explains too how it happens that, when we want to remember a name,
we remember one somewhat like it, indeed, but blunder in reference
to (i.e. in pronouncing) the one we intended. 

Thus, then, recollection takes place. 
But the point of capital importance is that (for the purpose of recollection)
one should cognize, determinately or indeterminately, the time-relation
(of that which he wishes to recollect). There is,-let it be taken
as a fact,-something by which one distinguishes a greater and a smaller
time; and it is reasonable to think that one does this in a way analogous
to that in which one discerns (spacial) magnitudes. For it is not
by the mind's reaching out towards them, as some say a visual ray
from the eye does (in seeing), that one thinks of large things at
a distance in space (for even if they are not there, one may similarly
think them); but one does so by a proportionate mental movement. For
there are in the mind the like figures and movements (i.e. 'like'
to those of objects and events). Therefore, when one thinks the greater
objects, in what will his thinking those differ from his thinking
the smaller? (In nothing,) because all the internal though smaller
are as it were proportional to the external. Now, as we may assume
within a person something proportional to the forms (of distant magnitudes),
so, too, we may doubtless assume also something else proportional
to their distances. As, therefore, if one has (psychically) the movement
in AB, Be, he constructs in thought (i.e. knows objectively) GD, since
AG and Gd bear equal ratios respectively (to AB and BE), (so he who
recollects also proceeds). Why then does he construct GD rather than
Zh? Is it not because as AG is to AB, so is O to I? These movements
therefore (sc. in AB, BE, and in O:I) he has simultaneously. But if
he wishes to construct to thought ZH, he has in mind BE in like manner
as before (when constructing GD), but now, instead of (the movements
of the ratio) O:I, he has in mind (those of the ratio K:L; for K:L::ZA:BA.
(See diagram.) 

When, therefore, the 'movement' corresponding to the object and that
corresponding to its time concur, then one actually remembers. If
one supposes (himself to move in these different but concurrent ways)
without really doing so, he supposes himself to remember.

For one may be mistaken, and think that he remembers when he really
does not. But it is not possible, conversely, that when one actually
remembers he should not suppose himself to remember, but should remember
unconsciously. For remembering, as we have conceived it, essentially
implies consciousness of itself. If, however, the movement corresponding
to the objective fact takes place without that corresponding to the
time, or, if the latter takes place without the former, one does not
remember. 

The movement answering to the time is of two kinds. Sometimes in remembering
a fact one has no determinate time-notion of it, no such notion as
that e.g. he did something or other on the day before yesterday; while
in other cases he has a determinate notion-of the time. Still, even
though one does not remember with actual determination of the time,
he genuinely remembers, none the less. Persons are wont to say that
they remember (something), but yet do not know when (it occurred,
as happens) whenever they do not know determinately the exact length
of time implied in the 'when'. 

It has been already stated that those who have a good memory are not
identical with those who are quick at recollecting. But the act of
recollecting differs from that of remembering, not only chronologically,
but also in this, that many also of the other animals (as well as
man) have memory, but, of all that we are acquainted with, none, we
venture to say, except man, shares in the faculty of recollection.
The cause of this is that recollection is, as it were a mode of inference.
For he who endeavours to recollect infers that he formerly saw, or
heard, or had some such experience, and the process (by which he succeeds
in recollecting) is, as it were, a sort of investigation. But to investigate
in this way belongs naturally to those animals alone which are also
endowed with the faculty of deliberation; (which proves what was said
above), for deliberation is a form of inference. 

That the affection is corporeal, i.e. that recollection is a searching
for an 'image' in a corporeal substrate, is proved by the fact that
in some persons, when, despite the most strenuous application of thought,
they have been unable to recollect, it (viz. the anamnesis = the effort
at recollection) excites a feeling of discomfort, which, even though
they abandon the effort at recollection, persists in them none the
less; and especially in persons of melancholic temperament. For these
are most powerfully moved by presentations. The reason why the effort
of recollection is not under the control of their will is that, as
those who throw a stone cannot stop it at their will when thrown,
so he who tries to recollect and 'hunts' (after an idea) sets up a
process in a material part, (that) in which resides the affection.
Those who have moisture around that part which is the centre of sense-perception
suffer most discomfort of this kind. For when once the moisture has
been set in motion it is not easily brought to rest, until the idea
which was sought for has again presented itself, and thus the movement
has found a straight course. For a similar reason bursts of anger
or fits of terror, when once they have excited such motions, are not
at once allayed, even though the angry or terrified persons (by efforts
of will) set up counter motions, but the passions continue to move
them on, in the same direction as at first, in opposition to such
counter motions. The affection resembles also that in the case of
words, tunes, or sayings, whenever one of them has become inveterate
on the lips. People give them up and resolve to avoid them; yet again
they find themselves humming the forbidden air, or using the prohibited
word. Those whose upper parts are abnormally large, as. is the case
with dwarfs, have abnormally weak memory, as compared with their opposites,
because of the great weight which they have resting upon the organ
of perception, and because their mnemonic movements are, from the
very first, not able to keep true to a course, but are dispersed,
and because, in the effort at recollection, these movements do not
easily find a direct onward path. Infants and very old persons have
bad memories, owing to the amount of movement going on within them;
for the latter are in process of rapid decay, the former in process
of vigorous growth; and we may add that children, until considerably
advanced in years, are dwarf-like in their bodily structure. Such
then is our theory as regards memory and remembering their nature,
and the particular organ of the soul by which animals remember; also
as regards recollection, its formal definition, and the manner and
causes-of its performance. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

"ALL men by nature desire to know. An indication of this is the delight
we take in our senses; for even apart from their usefulness they are
loved for themselves; and above all others the sense of sight. For
not only with a view to action, but even when we are not going to
do anything, we prefer seeing (one might say) to everything else.
The reason is that this, most of all the senses, makes us know and
brings to light many differences between things. 

"By nature animals are born with the faculty of sensation, and from
sensation memory is produced in some of them, though not in others.
And therefore the former are more intelligent and apt at learning
than those which cannot remember; those which are incapable of hearing
sounds are intelligent though they cannot be taught, e.g. the bee,
and any other race of animals that may be like it; and those which
besides memory have this sense of hearing can be taught.

"The animals other than man live by appearances and memories, and
have but little of connected experience; but the human race lives
also by art and reasonings. Now from memory experience is produced
in men; for the several memories of the same thing produce finally
the capacity for a single experience. And experience seems pretty
much like science and art, but really science and art come to men
through experience; for 'experience made art', as Polus says, 'but
inexperience luck.' Now art arises when from many notions gained by
experience one universal judgement about a class of objects is produced.
For to have a judgement that when Callias was ill of this disease
this did him good, and similarly in the case of Socrates and in many
individual cases, is a matter of experience; but to judge that it
has done good to all persons of a certain constitution, marked off
in one class, when they were ill of this disease, e.g. to phlegmatic
or bilious people when burning with fevers-this is a matter of art.

"With a view to action experience seems in no respect inferior to
art, and men of experience succeed even better than those who have
theory without experience. (The reason is that experience is knowledge
of individuals, art of universals, and actions and productions are
all concerned with the individual; for the physician does not cure
man, except in an incidental way, but Callias or Socrates or some
other called by some such individual name, who happens to be a man.
If, then, a man has the theory without the experience, and recognizes
the universal but does not know the individual included in this, he
will often fail to cure; for it is the individual that is to be cured.)
But yet we think that knowledge and understanding belong to art rather
than to experience, and we suppose artists to be wiser than men of
experience (which implies that Wisdom depends in all cases rather
on knowledge); and this because the former know the cause, but the
latter do not. For men of experience know that the thing is so, but
do not know why, while the others know the 'why' and the cause. Hence
we think also that the masterworkers in each craft are more honourable
and know in a truer sense and are wiser than the manual workers, because
they know the causes of the things that are done (we think the manual
workers are like certain lifeless things which act indeed, but act
without knowing what they do, as fire burns,-but while the lifeless
things perform each of their functions by a natural tendency, the
labourers perform them through habit); thus we view them as being
wiser not in virtue of being able to act, but of having the theory
for themselves and knowing the causes. And in general it is a sign
of the man who knows and of the man who does not know, that the former
can teach, and therefore we think art more truly knowledge than experience
is; for artists can teach, and men of mere experience cannot.

"Again, we do not regard any of the senses as Wisdom; yet surely these
give the most authoritative knowledge of particulars. But they do
not tell us the 'why' of anything-e.g. why fire is hot; they only
say that it is hot. 

"At first he who invented any art whatever that went beyond the common
perceptions of man was naturally admired by men, not only because
there was something useful in the inventions, but because he was thought
wise and superior to the rest. But as more arts were invented, and
some were directed to the necessities of life, others to recreation,
the inventors of the latter were naturally always regarded as wiser
than the inventors of the former, because their branches of knowledge
did not aim at utility. Hence when all such inventions were already
established, the sciences which do not aim at giving pleasure or at
the necessities of life were discovered, and first in the places where
men first began to have leisure. This is why the mathematical arts
were founded in Egypt; for there the priestly caste was allowed to
be at leisure. 

"We have said in the Ethics what the difference is between art and
science and the other kindred faculties; but the point of our present
discussion is this, that all men suppose what is called Wisdom to
deal with the first causes and the principles of things; so that,
as has been said before, the man of experience is thought to be wiser
than the possessors of any sense-perception whatever, the artist wiser
than the men of experience, the masterworker than the mechanic, and
the theoretical kinds of knowledge to be more of the nature of Wisdom
than the productive. Clearly then Wisdom is knowledge about certain
principles and causes. 

Part 2 "

"Since we are seeking this knowledge, we must inquire of what kind
are the causes and the principles, the knowledge of which is Wisdom.
If one were to take the notions we have about the wise man, this might
perhaps make the answer more evident. We suppose first, then, that
the wise man knows all things, as far as possible, although he has
not knowledge of each of them in detail; secondly, that he who can
learn things that are difficult, and not easy for man to know, is
wise (sense-perception is common to all, and therefore easy and no
mark of Wisdom); again, that he who is more exact and more capable
of teaching the causes is wiser, in every branch of knowledge; and
that of the sciences, also, that which is desirable on its own account
and for the sake of knowing it is more of the nature of Wisdom than
that which is desirable on account of its results, and the superior
science is more of the nature of Wisdom than the ancillary; for the
wise man must not be ordered but must order, and he must not obey
another, but the less wise must obey him. 

"Such and so many are the notions, then, which we have about Wisdom
and the wise. Now of these characteristics that of knowing all things
must belong to him who has in the highest degree universal knowledge;
for he knows in a sense all the instances that fall under the universal.
And these things, the most universal, are on the whole the hardest
for men to know; for they are farthest from the senses. And the most
exact of the sciences are those which deal most with first principles;
for those which involve fewer principles are more exact than those
which involve additional principles, e.g. arithmetic than geometry.
But the science which investigates causes is also instructive, in
a higher degree, for the people who instruct us are those who tell
the causes of each thing. And understanding and knowledge pursued
for their own sake are found most in the knowledge of that which is
most knowable (for he who chooses to know for the sake of knowing
will choose most readily that which is most truly knowledge, and such
is the knowledge of that which is most knowable); and the first principles
and the causes are most knowable; for by reason of these, and from
these, all other things come to be known, and not these by means of
the things subordinate to them. And the science which knows to what
end each thing must be done is the most authoritative of the sciences,
and more authoritative than any ancillary science; and this end is
the good of that thing, and in general the supreme good in the whole
of nature. Judged by all the tests we have mentioned, then, the name
in question falls to the same science; this must be a science that
investigates the first principles and causes; for the good, i.e. the
end, is one of the causes. 

"That it is not a science of production is clear even from the history
of the earliest philosophers. For it is owing to their wonder that
men both now begin and at first began to philosophize; they wondered
originally at the obvious difficulties, then advanced little by little
and stated difficulties about the greater matters, e.g. about the
phenomena of the moon and those of the sun and of the stars, and about
the genesis of the universe. And a man who is puzzled and wonders
thinks himself ignorant (whence even the lover of myth is in a sense
a lover of Wisdom, for the myth is composed of wonders); therefore
since they philosophized order to escape from ignorance, evidently
they were pursuing science in order to know, and not for any utilitarian
end. And this is confirmed by the facts; for it was when almost all
the necessities of life and the things that make for comfort and recreation
had been secured, that such knowledge began to be sought. Evidently
then we do not seek it for the sake of any other advantage; but as
the man is free, we say, who exists for his own sake and not for another's,
so we pursue this as the only free science, for it alone exists for
its own sake. 

"Hence also the possession of it might be justly regarded as beyond
human power; for in many ways human nature is in bondage, so that
according to Simonides 'God alone can have this privilege', and it
is unfitting that man should not be content to seek the knowledge
that is suited to him. If, then, there is something in what the poets
say, and jealousy is natural to the divine power, it would probably
occur in this case above all, and all who excelled in this knowledge
would be unfortunate. But the divine power cannot be jealous (nay,
according to the proverb, 'bards tell a lie'), nor should any other
science be thought more honourable than one of this sort. For the
most divine science is also most honourable; and this science alone
must be, in two ways, most divine. For the science which it would
be most meet for God to have is a divine science, and so is any science
that deals with divine objects; and this science alone has both these
qualities; for (1) God is thought to be among the causes of all things
and to be a first principle, and (2) such a science either God alone
can have, or God above all others. All the sciences, indeed, are more
necessary than this, but none is better. 

"Yet the acquisition of it must in a sense end in something which
is the opposite of our original inquiries. For all men begin, as we
said, by wondering that things are as they are, as they do about self-moving
marionettes, or about the solstices or the incommensurability of the
diagonal of a square with the side; for it seems wonderful to all
who have not yet seen the reason, that there is a thing which cannot
be measured even by the smallest unit. But we must end in the contrary
and, according to the proverb, the better state, as is the case in
these instances too when men learn the cause; for there is nothing
which would surprise a geometer so much as if the diagonal turned
out to be commensurable. 

"We have stated, then, what is the nature of the science we are searching
for, and what is the mark which our search and our whole investigation
must reach. 

Part 3 "

"Evidently we have to acquire knowledge of the original causes (for
we say we know each thing only when we think we recognize its first
cause), and causes are spoken of in four senses. In one of these we
mean the substance, i.e. the essence (for the 'why' is reducible finally
to the definition, and the ultimate 'why' is a cause and principle);
in another the matter or substratum, in a third the source of the
change, and in a fourth the cause opposed to this, the purpose and
the good (for this is the end of all generation and change). We have
studied these causes sufficiently in our work on nature, but yet let
us call to our aid those who have attacked the investigation of being
and philosophized about reality before us. For obviously they too
speak of certain principles and causes; to go over their views, then,
will be of profit to the present inquiry, for we shall either find
another kind of cause, or be more convinced of the correctness of
those which we now maintain. 

"Of the first philosophers, then, most thought the principles which
were of the nature of matter were the only principles of all things.
That of which all things that are consist, the first from which they
come to be, the last into which they are resolved (the substance remaining,
but changing in its modifications), this they say is the element and
this the principle of things, and therefore they think nothing is
either generated or destroyed, since this sort of entity is always
conserved, as we say Socrates neither comes to be absolutely when
he comes to be beautiful or musical, nor ceases to be when loses these
characteristics, because the substratum, Socrates himself remains.
just so they say nothing else comes to be or ceases to be; for there
must be some entity-either one or more than one-from which all other
things come to be, it being conserved. 

"Yet they do not all agree as to the number and the nature of these
principles. Thales, the founder of this type of philosophy, says the
principle is water (for which reason he declared that the earth rests
on water), getting the notion perhaps from seeing that the nutriment
of all things is moist, and that heat itself is generated from the
moist and kept alive by it (and that from which they come to be is
a principle of all things). He got his notion from this fact, and
from the fact that the seeds of all things have a moist nature, and
that water is the origin of the nature of moist things. 

"Some think that even the ancients who lived long before the present
generation, and first framed accounts of the gods, had a similar view
of nature; for they made Ocean and Tethys the parents of creation,
and described the oath of the gods as being by water, to which they
give the name of Styx; for what is oldest is most honourable, and
the most honourable thing is that by which one swears. It may perhaps
be uncertain whether this opinion about nature is primitive and ancient,
but Thales at any rate is said to have declared himself thus about
the first cause. Hippo no one would think fit to include among these
thinkers, because of the paltriness of his thought. 

"Anaximenes and Diogenes make air prior to water, and the most primary
of the simple bodies, while Hippasus of Metapontium and Heraclitus
of Ephesus say this of fire, and Empedocles says it of the four elements
(adding a fourth-earth-to those which have been named); for these,
he says, always remain and do not come to be, except that they come
to be more or fewer, being aggregated into one and segregated out
of one. 

"Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who, though older than Empedocles, was
later in his philosophical activity, says the principles are infinite
in number; for he says almost all the things that are made of parts
like themselves, in the manner of water or fire, are generated and
destroyed in this way, only by aggregation and segregation, and are
not in any other sense generated or destroyed, but remain eternally.

"From these facts one might think that the only cause is the so-called
material cause; but as men thus advanced, the very facts opened the
way for them and joined in forcing them to investigate the subject.
However true it may be that all generation and destruction proceed
from some one or (for that matter) from more elements, why does this
happen and what is the cause? For at least the substratum itself does
not make itself change; e.g. neither the wood nor the bronze causes
the change of either of them, nor does the wood manufacture a bed
and the bronze a statue, but something else is the cause of the change.
And to seek this is to seek the second cause, as we should say,-that
from which comes the beginning of the movement. Now those who at the
very beginning set themselves to this kind of inquiry, and said the
substratum was one, were not at all dissatisfied with themselves;
but some at least of those who maintain it to be one-as though defeated
by this search for the second cause-say the one and nature as a whole
is unchangeable not only in respect of generation and destruction
(for this is a primitive belief, and all agreed in it), but also of
all other change; and this view is peculiar to them. Of those who
said the universe was one, then none succeeded in discovering a cause
of this sort, except perhaps Parmenides, and he only inasmuch as he
supposes that there is not only one but also in some sense two causes.
But for those who make more elements it is more possible to state
the second cause, e.g. for those who make hot and cold, or fire and
earth, the elements; for they treat fire as having a nature which
fits it to move things, and water and earth and such things they treat
in the contrary way. 

"When these men and the principles of this kind had had their day,
as the latter were found inadequate to generate the nature of things
men were again forced by the truth itself, as we said, to inquire
into the next kind of cause. For it is not likely either that fire
or earth or any such element should be the reason why things manifest
goodness and, beauty both in their being and in their coming to be,
or that those thinkers should have supposed it was; nor again could
it be right to entrust so great a matter to spontaneity and chance.
When one man said, then, that reason was present-as in animals, so
throughout nature-as the cause of order and of all arrangement, he
seemed like a sober man in contrast with the random talk of his predecessors.
We know that Anaxagoras certainly adopted these views, but Hermotimus
of Clazomenae is credited with expressing them earlier. Those who
thought thus stated that there is a principle of things which is at
the same time the cause of beauty, and that sort of cause from which
things acquire movement. 

Part 4 "

"One might suspect that Hesiod was the first to look for such a thing-or
some one else who put love or desire among existing things as a principle,
as Parmenides, too, does; for he, in constructing the genesis of the
universe, says:- "

"Love first of all the Gods she planned. "

"And Hesiod says:- "

"First of all things was chaos made, and then 

"Broad-breasted earth... 

"And love, 'mid all the gods pre-eminent, "

which implies that among existing things there must be from the first
a cause which will move things and bring them together. How these
thinkers should be arranged with regard to priority of discovery let
us be allowed to decide later; but since the contraries of the various
forms of good were also perceived to be present in nature-not only
order and the beautiful, but also disorder and the ugly, and bad things
in greater number than good, and ignoble things than beautiful-therefore
another thinker introduced friendship and strife, each of the two
the cause of one of these two sets of qualities. For if we were to
follow out the view of Empedocles, and interpret it according to its
meaning and not to its lisping expression, we should find that friendship
is the cause of good things, and strife of bad. Therefore, if we said
that Empedocles in a sense both mentions, and is the first to mention,
the bad and the good as principles, we should perhaps be right, since
the cause of all goods is the good itself. 

"These thinkers, as we say, evidently grasped, and to this extent,
two of the causes which we distinguished in our work on nature-the
matter and the source of the movement-vaguely, however, and with no
clearness, but as untrained men behave in fights; for they go round
their opponents and often strike fine blows, but they do not fight
on scientific principles, and so too these thinkers do not seem to
know what they say; for it is evident that, as a rule, they make no
use of their causes except to a small extent. For Anaxagoras uses
reason as a deus ex machina for the making of the world, and when
he is at a loss to tell from what cause something necessarily is,
then he drags reason in, but in all other cases ascribes events to
anything rather than to reason. And Empedocles, though he uses the
causes to a greater extent than this, neither does so sufficiently
nor attains consistency in their use. At least, in many cases he makes
love segregate things, and strife aggregate them. For whenever the
universe is dissolved into its elements by strife, fire is aggregated
into one, and so is each of the other elements; but whenever again
under the influence of love they come together into one, the parts
must again be segregated out of each element. 

"Empedocles, then, in contrast with his precessors, was the first
to introduce the dividing of this cause, not positing one source of
movement, but different and contrary sources. Again, he was the first
to speak of four material elements; yet he does not use four, but
treats them as two only; he treats fire by itself, and its opposite-earth,
air, and water-as one kind of thing. We may learn this by study of
his verses. 

"This philosopher then, as we say, has spoken of the principles in
this way, and made them of this number. Leucippus and his associate
Democritus say that the full and the empty are the elements, calling
the one being and the other non-being-the full and solid being being,
the empty non-being (whence they say being no more is than non-being,
because the solid no more is than the empty); and they make these
the material causes of things. And as those who make the underlying
substance one generate all other things by its modifications, supposing
the rare and the dense to be the sources of the modifications, in
the same way these philosophers say the differences in the elements
are the causes of all other qualities. These differences, they say,
are three-shape and order and position. For they say the real is differentiated
only by 'rhythm and 'inter-contact' and 'turning'; and of these rhythm
is shape, inter-contact is order, and turning is position; for A differs
from N in shape, AN from NA in order, M from W in position. The question
of movement-whence or how it is to belong to things-these thinkers,
like the others, lazily neglected. 

"Regarding the two causes, then, as we say, the inquiry seems to have
been pushed thus far by the early philosophers. 

Part 5 "

"Contemporaneously with these philosophers and before them, the so-called
Pythagoreans, who were the first to take up mathematics, not only
advanced this study, but also having been brought up in it they thought
its principles were the principles of all things. Since of these principles
numbers are by nature the first, and in numbers they seemed to see
many resemblances to the things that exist and come into being-more
than in fire and earth and water (such and such a modification of
numbers being justice, another being soul and reason, another being
opportunity-and similarly almost all other things being numerically
expressible); since, again, they saw that the modifications and the
ratios of the musical scales were expressible in numbers;-since, then,
all other things seemed in their whole nature to be modelled on numbers,
and numbers seemed to be the first things in the whole of nature,
they supposed the elements of numbers to be the elements of all things,
and the whole heaven to be a musical scale and a number. And all the
properties of numbers and scales which they could show to agree with
the attributes and parts and the whole arrangement of the heavens,
they collected and fitted into their scheme; and if there was a gap
anywhere, they readily made additions so as to make their whole theory
coherent. E.g. as the number 10 is thought to be perfect and to comprise
the whole nature of numbers, they say that the bodies which move through
the heavens are ten, but as the visible bodies are only nine, to meet
this they invent a tenth--the 'counter-earth'. We have discussed these
matters more exactly elsewhere. 

"But the object of our review is that we may learn from these philosophers
also what they suppose to be the principles and how these fall under
the causes we have named. Evidently, then, these thinkers also consider
that number is the principle both as matter for things and as forming
both their modifications and their permanent states, and hold that
the elements of number are the even and the odd, and that of these
the latter is limited, and the former unlimited; and that the One
proceeds from both of these (for it is both even and odd), and number
from the One; and that the whole heaven, as has been said, is numbers.

"Other members of this same school say there are ten principles, which
they arrange in two columns of cognates-limit and unlimited, odd and
even, one and plurality, right and left, male and female, resting
and moving, straight and curved, light and darkness, good and bad,
square and oblong. In this way Alcmaeon of Croton seems also to have
conceived the matter, and either he got this view from them or they
got it from him; for he expressed himself similarly to them. For he
says most human affairs go in pairs, meaning not definite contrarieties
such as the Pythagoreans speak of, but any chance contrarieties, e.g.
white and black, sweet and bitter, good and bad, great and small.
He threw out indefinite suggestions about the other contrarieties,
but the Pythagoreans declared both how many and which their contraricties
are. 

"From both these schools, then, we can learn this much, that the contraries
are the principles of things; and how many these principles are and
which they are, we can learn from one of the two schools. But how
these principles can be brought together under the causes we have
named has not been clearly and articulately stated by them; they seem,
however, to range the elements under the head of matter; for out of
these as immanent parts they say substance is composed and moulded.

"From these facts we may sufficiently perceive the meaning of the
ancients who said the elements of nature were more than one; but there
are some who spoke of the universe as if it were one entity, though
they were not all alike either in the excellence of their statement
or in its conformity to the facts of nature. The discussion of them
is in no way appropriate to our present investigation of causes, for.
they do not, like some of the natural philosophers, assume being to
be one and yet generate it out of the one as out of matter, but they
speak in another way; those others add change, since they generate
the universe, but these thinkers say the universe is unchangeable.
Yet this much is germane to the present inquiry: Parmenides seems
to fasten on that which is one in definition, Melissus on that which
is one in matter, for which reason the former says that it is limited,
the latter that it is unlimited; while Xenophanes, the first of these
partisans of the One (for Parmenides is said to have been his pupil),
gave no clear statement, nor does he seem to have grasped the nature
of either of these causes, but with reference to the whole material
universe he says the One is God. Now these thinkers, as we said, must
be neglected for the purposes of the present inquiry-two of them entirely,
as being a little too naive, viz. Xenophanes and Melissus; but Parmenides
seems in places to speak with more insight. For, claiming that, besides
the existent, nothing non-existent exists, he thinks that of necessity
one thing exists, viz. the existent and nothing else (on this we have
spoken more clearly in our work on nature), but being forced to follow
the observed facts, and supposing the existence of that which is one
in definition, but more than one according to our sensations, he now
posits two causes and two principles, calling them hot and cold, i.e.
fire and earth; and of these he ranges the hot with the existent,
and the other with the non-existent. 

"From what has been said, then, and from the wise men who have now
sat in council with us, we have got thus much-on the one hand from
the earliest philosophers, who regard the first principle as corporeal
(for water and fire and such things are bodies), and of whom some
suppose that there is one corporeal principle, others that there are
more than one, but both put these under the head of matter; and on
the other hand from some who posit both this cause and besides this
the source of movement, which we have got from some as single and
from others as twofold. 

"Down to the Italian school, then, and apart from it, philosophers
have treated these subjects rather obscurely, except that, as we said,
they have in fact used two kinds of cause, and one of these-the source
of movement-some treat as one and others as two. But the Pythagoreans
have said in the same way that there are two principles, but added
this much, which is peculiar to them, that they thought that finitude
and infinity were not attributes of certain other things, e.g. of
fire or earth or anything else of this kind, but that infinity itself
and unity itself were the substance of the things of which they are
predicated. This is why number was the substance of all things. On
this subject, then, they expressed themselves thus; and regarding
the question of essence they began to make statements and definitions,
but treated the matter too simply. For they both defined superficially
and thought that the first subject of which a given definition was
predicable was the substance of the thing defined, as if one supposed
that 'double' and '2' were the same, because 2 is the first thing
of which 'double' is predicable. But surely to be double and to be
2 are not the same; if they are, one thing will be many-a consequence
which they actually drew. From the earlier philosophers, then, and
from their successors we can learn thus much. 

Part 6 "

"After the systems we have named came the philosophy of Plato, which
in most respects followed these thinkers, but had pecullarities that
distinguished it from the philosophy of the Italians. For, having
in his youth first become familiar with Cratylus and with the Heraclitean
doctrines (that all sensible things are ever in a state of flux and
there is no knowledge about them), these views he held even in later
years. Socrates, however, was busying himself about ethical matters
and neglecting the world of nature as a whole but seeking the universal
in these ethical matters, and fixed thought for the first time on
definitions; Plato accepted his teaching, but held that the problem
applied not to sensible things but to entities of another kind-for
this reason, that the common definition could not be a definition
of any sensible thing, as they were always changing. Things of this
other sort, then, he called Ideas, and sensible things, he said, were
all named after these, and in virtue of a relation to these; for the
many existed by participation in the Ideas that have the same name
as they. Only the name 'participation' was new; for the Pythagoreans
say that things exist by 'imitation' of numbers, and Plato says they
exist by participation, changing the name. But what the participation
or the imitation of the Forms could be they left an open question.

"Further, besides sensible things and Forms he says there are the
objects of mathematics, which occupy an intermediate position, differing
from sensible things in being eternal and unchangeable, from Forms
in that there are many alike, while the Form itself is in each case
unique. 

"Since the Forms were the causes of all other things, he thought their
elements were the elements of all things. As matter, the great and
the small were principles; as essential reality, the One; for from
the great and the small, by participation in the One, come the Numbers.

"But he agreed with the Pythagoreans in saying that the One is substance
and not a predicate of something else; and in saying that the Numbers
are the causes of the reality of other things he agreed with them;
but positing a dyad and constructing the infinite out of great and
small, instead of treating the infinite as one, is peculiar to him;
and so is his view that the Numbers exist apart from sensible things,
while they say that the things themselves are Numbers, and do not
place the objects of mathematics between Forms and sensible things.
His divergence from the Pythagoreans in making the One and the Numbers
separate from things, and his introduction of the Forms, were due
to his inquiries in the region of definitions (for the earlier thinkers
had no tincture of dialectic), and his making the other entity besides
the One a dyad was due to the belief that the numbers, except those
which were prime, could be neatly produced out of the dyad as out
of some plastic material. Yet what happens is the contrary; the theory
is not a reasonable one. For they make many things out of the matter,
and the form generates only once, but what we observe is that one
table is made from one matter, while the man who applies the form,
though he is one, makes many tables. And the relation of the male
to the female is similar; for the latter is impregnated by one copulation,
but the male impregnates many females; yet these are analogues of
those first principles. 

"Plato, then, declared himself thus on the points in question; it
is evident from what has been said that he has used only two causes,
that of the essence and the material cause (for the Forms are the
causes of the essence of all other things, and the One is the cause
of the essence of the Forms); and it is evident what the underlying
matter is, of which the Forms are predicated in the case of sensible
things, and the One in the case of Forms, viz. that this is a dyad,
the great and the small. Further, he has assigned the cause of good
and that of evil to the elements, one to each of the two, as we say
some of his predecessors sought to do, e.g. Empedocles and Anaxagoras.

Part 7 "

"Our review of those who have spoken about first principles and reality
and of the way in which they have spoken, has been concise and summary;
but yet we have learnt this much from them, that of those who speak
about 'principle' and 'cause' no one has mentioned any principle except
those which have been distinguished in our work on nature, but all
evidently have some inkling of them, though only vaguely. For some
speak of the first principle as matter, whether they suppose one or
more first principles, and whether they suppose this to be a body
or to be incorporeal; e.g. Plato spoke of the great and the small,
the Italians of the infinite, Empedocles of fire, earth, water, and
air, Anaxagoras of the infinity of things composed of similar parts.
These, then, have all had a notion of this kind of cause, and so have
all who speak of air or fire or water, or something denser than fire
and rarer than air; for some have said the prime element is of this
kind. 

"These thinkers grasped this cause only; but certain others have mentioned
the source of movement, e.g. those who make friendship and strife,
or reason, or love, a principle. 

"The essence, i.e. the substantial reality, no one has expressed distinctly.
It is hinted at chiefly by those who believe in the Forms; for they
do not suppose either that the Forms are the matter of sensible things,
and the One the matter of the Forms, or that they are the source of
movement (for they say these are causes rather of immobility and of
being at rest), but they furnish the Forms as the essence of every
other thing, and the One as the essence of the Forms. 

"That for whose sake actions and changes and movements take place,
they assert to be a cause in a way, but not in this way, i.e. not
in the way in which it is its nature to be a cause. For those who
speak of reason or friendship class these causes as goods; they do
not speak, however, as if anything that exists either existed or came
into being for the sake of these, but as if movements started from
these. In the same way those who say the One or the existent is the
good, say that it is the cause of substance, but not that substance
either is or comes to be for the sake of this. Therefore it turns
out that in a sense they both say and do not say the good is a cause;
for they do not call it a cause qua good but only incidentally.

"All these thinkers then, as they cannot pitch on another cause, seem
to testify that we have determined rightly both how many and of what
sort the causes are. Besides this it is plain that when the causes
are being looked for, either all four must be sought thus or they
must be sought in one of these four ways. Let us next discuss the
possible difficulties with regard to the way in which each of these
thinkers has spoken, and with regard to his situation relatively to
the first principles. 

Part 8 "

"Those, then, who say the universe is one and posit one kind of thing
as matter, and as corporeal matter which has spatial magnitude, evidently
go astray in many ways. For they posit the elements of bodies only,
not of incorporeal things, though there are also incorporeal things.
And in trying to state the causes of generation and destruction, and
in giving a physical account of all things, they do away with the
cause of movement. Further, they err in not positing the substance,
i.e. the essence, as the cause of anything, and besides this in lightly
calling any of the simple bodies except earth the first principle,
without inquiring how they are produced out of one anothers-I mean
fire, water, earth, and air. For some things are produced out of each
other by combination, others by separation, and this makes the greatest
difference to their priority and posteriority. For (1) in a way the
property of being most elementary of all would seem to belong to the
first thing from which they are produced by combination, and this
property would belong to the most fine-grained and subtle of bodies.
For this reason those who make fire the principle would be most in
agreement with this argument. But each of the other thinkers agrees
that the element of corporeal things is of this sort. At least none
of those who named one element claimed that earth was the element,
evidently because of the coarseness of its grain. (Of the other three
elements each has found some judge on its side; for some maintain
that fire, others that water, others that air is the element. Yet
why, after all, do they not name earth also, as most men do? For people
say all things are earth Hesiod says earth was produced first of corporeal
things; so primitive and popular has the opinion been.) According
to this argument, then, no one would be right who either says the
first principle is any of the elements other than fire, or supposes
it to be denser than air but rarer than water. But (2) if that which
is later in generation is prior in nature, and that which is concocted
and compounded is later in generation, the contrary of what we have
been saying must be true,-water must be prior to air, and earth to
water. 

"So much, then, for those who posit one cause such as we mentioned;
but the same is true if one supposes more of these, as Empedocles
says matter of things is four bodies. For he too is confronted by
consequences some of which are the same as have been mentioned, while
others are peculiar to him. For we see these bodies produced from
one another, which implies that the same body does not always remain
fire or earth (we have spoken about this in our works on nature);
and regarding the cause of movement and the question whether we must
posit one or two, he must be thought to have spoken neither correctly
nor altogether plausibly. And in general, change of quality is necessarily
done away with for those who speak thus, for on their view cold will
not come from hot nor hot from cold. For if it did there would be
something that accepted the contraries themselves, and there would
be some one entity that became fire and water, which Empedocles denies.

"As regards Anaxagoras, if one were to suppose that he said there
were two elements, the supposition would accord thoroughly with an
argument which Anaxagoras himself did not state articulately, but
which he must have accepted if any one had led him on to it. True,
to say that in the beginning all things were mixed is absurd both
on other grounds and because it follows that they must have existed
before in an unmixed form, and because nature does not allow any chance
thing to be mixed with any chance thing, and also because on this
view modifications and accidents could be separated from substances
(for the same things which are mixed can be separated); yet if one
were to follow him up, piecing together what he means, he would perhaps
be seen to be somewhat modern in his views. For when nothing was separated
out, evidently nothing could be truly asserted of the substance that
then existed. I mean, e.g. that it was neither white nor black, nor
grey nor any other colour, but of necessity colourless; for if it
had been coloured, it would have had one of these colours. And similarly,
by this same argument, it was flavourless, nor had it any similar
attribute; for it could not be either of any quality or of any size,
nor could it be any definite kind of thing. For if it were, one of
the particular forms would have belonged to it, and this is impossible,
since all were mixed together; for the particular form would necessarily
have been already separated out, but he all were mixed except reason,
and this alone was unmixed and pure. From this it follows, then, that
he must say the principles are the One (for this is simple and unmixed)
and the Other, which is of such a nature as we suppose the indefinite
to be before it is defined and partakes of some form. Therefore, while
expressing himself neither rightly nor clearly, he means something
like what the later thinkers say and what is now more clearly seen
to be the case. 

"But these thinkers are, after all, at home only in arguments about
generation and destruction and movement; for it is practically only
of this sort of substance that they seek the principles and the causes.
But those who extend their vision to all things that exist, and of
existing things suppose some to be perceptible and others not perceptible,
evidently study both classes, which is all the more reason why one
should devote some time to seeing what is good in their views and
what bad from the standpoint of the inquiry we have now before us.

"The 'Pythagoreans' treat of principles and elements stranger than
those of the physical philosophers (the reason is that they got the
principles from non-sensible things, for the objects of mathematics,
except those of astronomy, are of the class of things without movement);
yet their discussions and investigations are all about nature; for
they generate the heavens, and with regard to their parts and attributes
and functions they observe the phenomena, and use up the principles
and the causes in explaining these, which implies that they agree
with the others, the physical philosophers, that the real is just
all that which is perceptible and contained by the so-called 'heavens'.
But the causes and the principles which they mention are, as we said,
sufficient to act as steps even up to the higher realms of reality,
and are more suited to these than to theories about nature. They do
not tell us at all, however, how there can be movement if limit and
unlimited and odd and even are the only things assumed, or how without
movement and change there can be generation and destruction, or the
bodies that move through the heavens can do what they do.

"Further, if one either granted them that spatial magnitude consists
of these elements, or this were proved, still how would some bodies
be light and others have weight? To judge from what they assume and
maintain they are speaking no more of mathematical bodies than of
perceptible; hence they have said nothing whatever about fire or earth
or the other bodies of this sort, I suppose because they have nothing
to say which applies peculiarly to perceptible things. 

"Further, how are we to combine the beliefs that the attributes of
number, and number itself, are causes of what exists and happens in
the heavens both from the beginning and now, and that there is no
other number than this number out of which the world is composed?
When in one particular region they place opinion and opportunity,
and, a little above or below, injustice and decision or mixture, and
allege, as proof, that each of these is a number, and that there happens
to be already in this place a plurality of the extended bodies composed
of numbers, because these attributes of number attach to the various
places,-this being so, is this number, which we must suppose each
of these abstractions to be, the same number which is exhibited in
the material universe, or is it another than this? Plato says it is
different; yet even he thinks that both these bodies and their causes
are numbers, but that the intelligible numbers are causes, while the
others are sensible. 

Part 9 "

"Let us leave the Pythagoreans for the present; for it is enough to
have touched on them as much as we have done. But as for those who
posit the Ideas as causes, firstly, in seeking to grasp the causes
of the things around us, they introduced others equal in number to
these, as if a man who wanted to count things thought he would not
be able to do it while they were few, but tried to count them when
he had added to their number. For the Forms are practically equal
to-or not fewer than-the things, in trying to explain which these
thinkers proceeded from them to the Forms. For to each thing there
answers an entity which has the same name and exists apart from the
substances, and so also in the case of all other groups there is a
one over many, whether the many are in this world or are eternal.

"Further, of the ways in which we prove that the Forms exist, none
is convincing; for from some no inference necessarily follows, and
from some arise Forms even of things of which we think there are no
Forms. For according to the arguments from the existence of the sciences
there will be Forms of all things of which there are sciences and
according to the 'one over many' argument there will be Forms even
of negations, and according to the argument that there is an object
for thought even when the thing has perished, there will be Forms
of perishable things; for we have an image of these. Further, of the
more accurate arguments, some lead to Ideas of relations, of which
we say there is no independent class, and others introduce the 'third
man'. 

"And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy the things for
whose existence we are more zealous than for the existence of the
Ideas; for it follows that not the dyad but number is first, i.e.
that the relative is prior to the absolute,-besides all the other
points on which certain people by following out the opinions held
about the Ideas have come into conflict with the principles of the
theory. 

"Further, according to the assumption on which our belief in the Ideas
rests, there will be Forms not only of substances but also of many
other things (for the concept is single not only in the case of substances
but also in the other cases, and there are sciences not only of substance
but also of other things, and a thousand other such difficulties confront
them). But according to the necessities of the case and the opinions
held about the Forms, if Forms can be shared in there must be Ideas
of substances only. For they are not shared in incidentally, but a
thing must share in its Form as in something not predicated of a subject
(by 'being shared in incidentally' I mean that e.g. if a thing shares
in 'double itself', it shares also in 'eternal', but incidentally;
for 'eternal' happens to be predicable of the 'double'). Therefore
the Forms will be substance; but the same terms indicate substance
in this and in the ideal world (or what will be the meaning of saying
that there is something apart from the particulars-the one over many?).
And if the Ideas and the particulars that share in them have the same
form, there will be something common to these; for why should '2'
be one and the same in the perishable 2's or in those which are many
but eternal, and not the same in the '2' itself' as in the particular
2? But if they have not the same form, they must have only the name
in common, and it is as if one were to call both Callias and a wooden
image a 'man', without observing any community between them.

"Above all one might discuss the question what on earth the Forms
contribute to sensible things, either to those that are eternal or
to those that come into being and cease to be. For they cause neither
movement nor any change in them. But again they help in no wise either
towards the knowledge of the other things (for they are not even the
substance of these, else they would have been in them), or towards
their being, if they are not in the particulars which share in them;
though if they were, they might be thought to be causes, as white
causes whiteness in a white object by entering into its composition.
But this argument, which first Anaxagoras and later Eudoxus and certain
others used, is very easily upset; for it is not difficult to collect
many insuperable objections to such a view. 

"But, further, all other things cannot come from the Forms in any
of the usual senses of 'from'. And to say that they are patterns and
the other things share in them is to use empty words and poetical
metaphors. For what is it that works, looking to the Ideas? And anything
can either be, or become, like another without being copied from it,
so that whether Socrates or not a man Socrates like might come to
be; and evidently this might be so even if Socrates were eternal.
And there will be several patterns of the same thing, and therefore
several Forms; e.g. 'animal' and 'two-footed' and also 'man himself'
will be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are patterns not only sensible
things, but of Forms themselves also; i.e. the genus, as genus of
various species, will be so; therefore the same thing will be pattern
and copy. 

"Again, it would seem impossible that the substance and that of which
it is the substance should exist apart; how, therefore, could the
Ideas, being the substances of things, exist apart? In the Phaedo'
the case is stated in this way-that the Forms are causes both of being
and of becoming; yet when the Forms exist, still the things that share
in them do not come into being, unless there is something to originate
movement; and many other things come into being (e.g. a house or a
ring) of which we say there are no Forms. Clearly, therefore, even
the other things can both be and come into being owing to such causes
as produce the things just mentioned. 

"Again, if the Forms are numbers, how can they be causes? Is it because
existing things are other numbers, e.g. one number is man, another
is Socrates, another Callias? Why then are the one set of numbers
causes of the other set? It will not make any difference even if the
former are eternal and the latter are not. But if it is because things
in this sensible world (e.g. harmony) are ratios of numbers, evidently
the things between which they are ratios are some one class of things.
If, then, this--the matter--is some definite thing, evidently the
numbers themselves too will be ratios of something to something else.
E.g. if Callias is a numerical ratio between fire and earth and water
and air, his Idea also will be a number of certain other underlying
things; and man himself, whether it is a number in a sense or not,
will still be a numerical ratio of certain things and not a number
proper, nor will it be a of number merely because it is a numerical
ratio. 

"Again, from many numbers one number is produced, but how can one
Form come from many Forms? And if the number comes not from the many
numbers themselves but from the units in them, e.g. in 10,000, how
is it with the units? If they are specifically alike, numerous absurdities
will follow, and also if they are not alike (neither the units in
one number being themselves like one another nor those in other numbers
being all like to all); for in what will they differ, as they are
without quality? This is not a plausible view, nor is it consistent
with our thought on the matter. 

"Further, they must set up a second kind of number (with which arithmetic
deals), and all the objects which are called 'intermediate' by some
thinkers; and how do these exist or from what principles do they proceed?
Or why must they be intermediate between the things in this sensible
world and the things-themselves? 

"Further, the units in must each come from a prior but this is impossible.

"Further, why is a number, when taken all together, one?

"Again, besides what has been said, if the units are diverse the Platonists
should have spoken like those who say there are four, or two, elements;
for each of these thinkers gives the name of element not to that which
is common, e.g. to body, but to fire and earth, whether there is something
common to them, viz. body, or not. But in fact the Platonists speak
as if the One were homogeneous like fire or water; and if this is
so, the numbers will not be substances. Evidently, if there is a One
itself and this is a first principle, 'one' is being used in more
than one sense; for otherwise the theory is impossible. 

"When we wish to reduce substances to their principles, we state that
lines come from the short and long (i.e. from a kind of small and
great), and the plane from the broad and narrow, and body from the
deep and shallow. Yet how then can either the plane contain a line,
or the solid a line or a plane? For the broad and narrow is a different
class from the deep and shallow. Therefore, just as number is not
present in these, because the many and few are different from these,
evidently no other of the higher classes will be present in the lower.
But again the broad is not a genus which includes the deep, for then
the solid would have been a species of plane. Further, from what principle
will the presence of the points in the line be derived? Plato even
used to object to this class of things as being a geometrical fiction.
He gave the name of principle of the line-and this he often posited-to
the indivisible lines. Yet these must have a limit; therefore the
argument from which the existence of the line follows proves also
the existence of the point. 

"In general, though philosophy seeks the cause of perceptible things,
we have given this up (for we say nothing of the cause from which
change takes its start), but while we fancy we are stating the substance
of perceptible things, we assert the existence of a second class of
substances, while our account of the way in which they are the substances
of perceptible things is empty talk; for 'sharing', as we said before,
means nothing. 

"Nor have the Forms any connexion with what we see to be the cause
in the case of the arts, that for whose sake both all mind and the
whole of nature are operative,-with this cause which we assert to
be one of the first principles; but mathematics has come to be identical
with philosophy for modern thinkers, though they say that it should
be studied for the sake of other things. Further, one might suppose
that the substance which according to them underlies as matter is
too mathematical, and is a predicate and differentia of the substance,
ie. of the matter, rather than matter itself; i.e. the great and the
small are like the rare and the dense which the physical philosophers
speak of, calling these the primary differentiae of the substratum;
for these are a kind of excess and defect. And regarding movement,
if the great and the small are to he movement, evidently the Forms
will be moved; but if they are not to be movement, whence did movement
come? The whole study of nature has been annihilated. 

"And what is thought to be easy-to show that all things are one-is
not done; for what is proved by the method of setting out instances
is not that all things are one but that there is a One itself,-if
we grant all the assumptions. And not even this follows, if we do
not grant that the universal is a genus; and this in some cases it
cannot be. 

"Nor can it be explained either how the lines and planes and solids
that come after the numbers exist or can exist, or what significance
they have; for these can neither be Forms (for they are not numbers),
nor the intermediates (for those are the objects of mathematics),
nor the perishable things. This is evidently a distinct fourth class.

"In general, if we search for the elements of existing things without
distinguishing the many senses in which things are said to exist,
we cannot find them, especially if the search for the elements of
which things are made is conducted in this manner. For it is surely
impossible to discover what 'acting' or 'being acted on', or 'the
straight', is made of, but if elements can be discovered at all, it
is only the elements of substances; therefore either to seek the elements
of all existing things or to think one has them is incorrect.

"And how could we learn the elements of all things? Evidently we cannot
start by knowing anything before. For as he who is learning geometry,
though he may know other things before, knows none of the things with
which the science deals and about which he is to learn, so is it in
all other cases. Therefore if there is a science of all things, such
as some assert to exist, he who is learning this will know nothing
before. Yet all learning is by means of premisses which are (either
all or some of them) known before,-whether the learning be by demonstration
or by definitions; for the elements of the definition must be known
before and be familiar; and learning by induction proceeds similarly.
But again, if the science were actually innate, it were strange that
we are unaware of our possession of the greatest of sciences.

"Again, how is one to come to know what all things are made of, and
how is this to be made evident? This also affords a difficulty; for
there might be a conflict of opinion, as there is about certain syllables;
some say za is made out of s and d and a, while others say it is a
distinct sound and none of those that are familiar. 

"Further, how could we know the objects of sense without having the
sense in question? Yet we ought to, if the elements of which all things
consist, as complex sounds consist of the clements proper to sound,
are the same. 

Part 10 "

"It is evident, then, even from what we have said before, that all
men seem to seek the causes named in the Physics, and that we cannot
name any beyond these; but they seek these vaguely; and though in
a sense they have all been described before, in a sense they have
not been described at all. For the earliest philosophy is, on all
subjects, like one who lisps, since it is young and in its beginnings.
For even Empedocles says bone exists by virtue of the ratio in it.
Now this is the essence and the substance of the thing. But it is
similarly necessary that flesh and each of the other tissues should
be the ratio of its elements, or that not one of them should; for
it is on account of this that both flesh and bone and everything else
will exist, and not on account of the matter, which he names,-fire
and earth and water and air. But while he would necessarily have agreed
if another had said this, he has not said it clearly. 

"On these questions our views have been expressed before; but let
us return to enumerate the difficulties that might be raised on these
same points; for perhaps we may get from them some help towards our
later difficulties. 



BOOK II

Part 1 

"

"THE investigation of the truth is in one way hard, in another easy.
An indication of this is found in the fact that no one is able to
attain the truth adequately, while, on the other hand, we do not collectively
fail, but every one says something true about the nature of things,
and while individually we contribute little or nothing to the truth,
by the union of all a considerable amount is amassed. Therefore, since
the truth seems to be like the proverbial door, which no one can fail
to hit, in this respect it must be easy, but the fact that we can
have a whole truth and not the particular part we aim at shows the
difficulty of it. 

"Perhaps, too, as difficulties are of two kinds, the cause of the
present difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the eyes
of bats are to the blaze of day, so is the reason in our soul to the
things which are by nature most evident of all. 

"It is just that we should be grateful, not only to those with whose
views we may agree, but also to those who have expressed more superficial
views; for these also contributed something, by developing before
us the powers of thought. It is true that if there had been no Timotheus
we should have been without much of our lyric poetry; but if there
had been no Phrynis there would have been no Timotheus. The same holds
good of those who have expressed views about the truth; for from some
thinkers we have inherited certain opinions, while the others have
been responsible for the appearance of the former. 

"It is right also that philosophy should be called knowledge of the
truth. For the end of theoretical knowledge is truth, while that of
practical knowledge is action (for even if they consider how things
are, practical men do not study the eternal, but what is relative
and in the present). Now we do not know a truth without its cause;
and a thing has a quality in a higher degree than other things if
in virtue of it the similar quality belongs to the other things as
well (e.g. fire is the hottest of things; for it is the cause of the
heat of all other things); so that that causes derivative truths to
be true is most true. Hence the principles of eternal things must
be always most true (for they are not merely sometimes true, nor is
there any cause of their being, but they themselves are the cause
of the being of other things), so that as each thing is in respect
of being, so is it in respect of truth. 

Part 2 "

"But evidently there is a first principle, and the causes of things
are neither an infinite series nor infinitely various in kind. For
neither can one thing proceed from another, as from matter, ad infinitum
(e.g. flesh from earth, earth from air, air from fire, and so on without
stopping), nor can the sources of movement form an endless series
(man for instance being acted on by air, air by the sun, the sun by
Strife, and so on without limit). Similarly the final causes cannot
go on ad infinitum,-walking being for the sake of health, this for
the sake of happiness, happiness for the sake of something else, and
so one thing always for the sake of another. And the case of the essence
is similar. For in the case of intermediates, which have a last term
and a term prior to them, the prior must be the cause of the later
terms. For if we had to say which of the three is the cause, we should
say the first; surely not the last, for the final term is the cause
of none; nor even the intermediate, for it is the cause only of one.
(It makes no difference whether there is one intermediate or more,
nor whether they are infinite or finite in number.) But of series
which are infinite in this way, and of the infinite in general, all
the parts down to that now present are alike intermediates; so that
if there is no first there is no cause at all. 

"Nor can there be an infinite process downwards, with a beginning
in the upward direction, so that water should proceed from fire, earth
from water, and so always some other kind should be produced. For
one thing comes from another in two ways-not in the sense in which
'from' means 'after' (as we say 'from the Isthmian games come the
Olympian'), but either (i) as the man comes from the boy, by the boy's
changing, or (ii) as air comes from water. By 'as the man comes from
the boy' we mean 'as that which has come to be from that which is
coming to be' or 'as that which is finished from that which is being
achieved' (for as becoming is between being and not being, so that
which is becoming is always between that which is and that which is
not; for the learner is a man of science in the making, and this is
what is meant when we say that from a learner a man of science is
being made); on the other hand, coming from another thing as water
comes from air implies the destruction of the other thing. This is
why changes of the former kind are not reversible, and the boy does
not come from the man (for it is not that which comes to be something
that comes to be as a result of coming to be, but that which exists
after the coming to be; for it is thus that the day, too, comes from
the morning-in the sense that it comes after the morning; which is
the reason why the morning cannot come from the day); but changes
of the other kind are reversible. But in both cases it is impossible
that the number of terms should be infinite. For terms of the former
kind, being intermediates, must have an end, and terms of the latter
kind change back into one another, for the destruction of either is
the generation of the other. 

"At the same time it is impossible that the first cause, being eternal,
should be destroyed; for since the process of becoming is not infinite
in the upward direction, that which is the first thing by whose destruction
something came to be must be non-eternal. 

"Further, the final cause is an end, and that sort of end which is
not for the sake of something else, but for whose sake everything
else is; so that if there is to be a last term of this sort, the process
will not be infinite; but if there is no such term, there will be
no final cause, but those who maintain the infinite series eliminate
the Good without knowing it (yet no one would try to do anything if
he were not going to come to a limit); nor would there be reason in
the world; the reasonable man, at least, always acts for a purpose,
and this is a limit; for the end is a limit. 

"But the essence, also, cannot be reduced to another definition which
is fuller in expression. For the original definition is always more
of a definition, and not the later one; and in a series in which the
first term has not the required character, the next has not it either.
Further, those who speak thus destroy science; for it is not possible
to have this till one comes to the unanalysable terms. And knowledge
becomes impossible; for how can one apprehend things that are infinite
in this way? For this is not like the case of the line, to whose divisibility
there is no stop, but which we cannot think if we do not make a stop
(for which reason one who is tracing the infinitely divisible line
cannot be counting the possibilities of section), but the whole line
also must be apprehended by something in us that does not move from
part to part.-Again, nothing infinite can exist; and if it could,
at least the notion of infinity is not infinite. 

"But if the kinds of causes had been infinite in number, then also
knowledge would have been impossible; for we think we know, only when
we have ascertained the causes, that but that which is infinite by
addition cannot be gone through in a finite time. 

Part 3 "

"The effect which lectures produce on a hearer depends on his habits;
for we demand the language we are accustomed to, and that which is
different from this seems not in keeping but somewhat unintelligible
and foreign because of its unwontedness. For it is the customary that
is intelligible. The force of habit is shown by the laws, in which
the legendary and childish elements prevail over our knowledge about
them, owing to habit. Thus some people do not listen to a speaker
unless he speaks mathematically, others unless he gives instances,
while others expect him to cite a poet as witness. And some want to
have everything done accurately, while others are annoyed by accuracy,
either because they cannot follow the connexion of thought or because
they regard it as pettifoggery. For accuracy has something of this
character, so that as in trade so in argument some people think it
mean. Hence one must be already trained to know how to take each sort
of argument, since it is absurd to seek at the same time knowledge
and the way of attaining knowledge; and it is not easy to get even
one of the two. 

"The minute accuracy of mathematics is not to be demanded in all cases,
but only in the case of things which have no matter. Hence method
is not that of natural science; for presumably the whole of nature
has matter. Hence we must inquire first what nature is: for thus we
shall also see what natural science treats of (and whether it belongs
to one science or to more to investigate the causes and the principles
of things). 



BOOK III

Part 1 

"

"WE must, with a view to the science which we are seeking, first recount
the subjects that should be first discussed. These include both the
other opinions that some have held on the first principles, and any
point besides these that happens to have been overlooked. For those
who wish to get clear of difficulties it is advantageous to discuss
the difficulties well; for the subsequent free play of thought implies
the solution of the previous difficulties, and it is not possible
to untie a knot of which one does not know. But the difficulty of
our thinking points to a 'knot' in the object; for in so far as our
thought is in difficulties, it is in like case with those who are
bound; for in either case it is impossible to go forward. Hence one
should have surveyed all the difficulties beforehand, both for the
purposes we have stated and because people who inquire without first
stating the difficulties are like those who do not know where they
have to go; besides, a man does not otherwise know even whether he
has at any given time found what he is looking for or not; for the
end is not clear to such a man, while to him who has first discussed
the difficulties it is clear. Further, he who has heard all the contending
arguments, as if they were the parties to a case, must be in a better
position for judging. 

"The first problem concerns the subject which we discussed in our
prefatory remarks. It is this-(1) whether the investigation of the
causes belongs to one or to more sciences, and (2) whether such a
science should survey only the first principles of substance, or also
the principles on which all men base their proofs, e.g. whether it
is possible at the same time to assert and deny one and the same thing
or not, and all other such questions; and (3) if the science in question
deals with substance, whether one science deals with all substances,
or more than one, and if more, whether all are akin, or some of them
must be called forms of Wisdom and the others something else. And
(4) this itself is also one of the things that must be discussed-whether
sensible substances alone should be said to exist or others also besides
them, and whether these others are of one kind or there are several
classes of substances, as is supposed by those who believe both in
Forms and in mathematical objects intermediate between these and sensible
things. Into these questions, then, as we say, we must inquire, and
also (5) whether our investigation is concerned only with substances
or also with the essential attributes of substances. Further, with
regard to the same and other and like and unlike and contrariety,
and with regard to prior and posterior and all other such terms about
which the dialecticians try to inquire, starting their investigation
from probable premises only,-whose business is it to inquire into
all these? Further, we must discuss the essential attributes of these
themselves; and we must ask not only what each of these is, but also
whether one thing always has one contrary. Again (6), are the principles
and elements of things the genera, or the parts present in each thing,
into which it is divided; and (7) if they are the genera, are they
the genera that are predicated proximately of the individuals, or
the highest genera, e.g. is animal or man the first principle and
the more independent of the individual instance? And (8) we must inquire
and discuss especially whether there is, besides the matter, any thing
that is a cause in itself or not, and whether this can exist apart
or not, and whether it is one or more in number, and whether there
is something apart from the concrete thing (by the concrete thing
I mean the matter with something already predicated of it), or there
is nothing apart, or there is something in some cases though not in
others, and what sort of cases these are. Again (9) we ask whether
the principles are limited in number or in kind, both those in the
definitions and those in the substratum; and (10) whether the principles
of perishable and of imperishable things are the same or different;
and whether they are all imperishable or those of perishable things
are perishable. Further (11) there is the question which is hardest
of all and most perplexing, whether unity and being, as the Pythagoreans
and Plato said, are not attributes of something else but the substance
of existing things, or this is not the case, but the substratum is
something else,-as Empedocles says, love; as some one else says, fire;
while another says water or air. Again (12) we ask whether the principles
are universal or like individual things, and (13) whether they exist
potentially or actually, and further, whether they are potential or
actual in any other sense than in reference to movement; for these
questions also would present much difficulty. Further (14), are numbers
and lines and figures and points a kind of substance or not, and if
they are substances are they separate from sensible things or present
in them? With regard to all these matters not only is it hard to get
possession of the truth, but it is not easy even to think out the
difficulties well. 

Part 2 "

"(1) First then with regard to what we mentioned first, does it belong
to one or to more sciences to investigate all the kinds of causes?
How could it belong to one science to recognize the principles if
these are not contrary? 

"Further, there are many things to which not all the principles pertain.
For how can a principle of change or the nature of the good exist
for unchangeable things, since everything that in itself and by its
own nature is good is an end, and a cause in the sense that for its
sake the other things both come to be and are, and since an end or
purpose is the end of some action, and all actions imply change? So
in the case of unchangeable things this principle could not exist,
nor could there be a good itself. This is why in mathematics nothing
is proved by means of this kind of cause, nor is there any demonstration
of this kind-'because it is better, or worse'; indeed no one even
mentions anything of the kind. And so for this reason some of the
Sophists, e.g. Aristippus, used to ridicule mathematics; for in the
arts (he maintained), even in the industrial arts, e.g. in carpentry
and cobbling, the reason always given is 'because it is better, or
worse,' but the mathematical sciences take no account of goods and
evils. 

"But if there are several sciences of the causes, and a different
science for each different principle, which of these sciences should
be said to be that which we seek, or which of the people who possess
them has the most scientific knowledge of the object in question?
The same thing may have all the kinds of causes, e.g. the moving cause
of a house is the art or the builder, the final cause is the function
it fulfils, the matter is earth and stones, and the form is the definition.
To judge from our previous discussion of the question which of the
sciences should be called Wisdom, there is reason for applying the
name to each of them. For inasmuch as it is most architectonic and
authoritative and the other sciences, like slavewomen, may not even
contradict it, the science of the end and of the good is of the nature
of Wisdom (for the other things are for the sake of the end). But
inasmuch as it was described' as dealing with the first causes and
that which is in the highest sense object of knowledge, the science
of substance must be of the nature of Wisdom. For since men may know
the same thing in many ways, we say that he who recognizes what a
thing is by its being so and so knows more fully than he who recognizes
it by its not being so and so, and in the former class itself one
knows more fully than another, and he knows most fully who knows what
a thing is, not he who knows its quantity or quality or what it can
by nature do or have done to it. And further in all cases also we
think that the knowledge of each even of the things of which demonstration
is possible is present only when we know what the thing is, e.g. what
squaring a rectangle is, viz. that it is the finding of a mean; and
similarly in all other cases. And we know about becomings and actions
and about every change when we know the source of the movement; and
this is other than and opposed to the end. Therefore it would seem
to belong to different sciences to investigate these causes severally.

"But (2), taking the starting-points of demonstration as well as the
causes, it is a disputable question whether they are the object of
one science or of more (by the starting-points of demonstration I
mean the common beliefs, on which all men base their proofs); e.g.
that everything must be either affirmed or denied, and that a thing
cannot at the same time be and not be, and all other such premisses:-the
question is whether the same science deals with them as with substance,
or a different science, and if it is not one science, which of the
two must be identified with that which we now seek.-It is not reasonable
that these topics should be the object of one science; for why should
it be peculiarly appropriate to geometry or to any other science to
understand these matters? If then it belongs to every science alike,
and cannot belong to all, it is not peculiar to the science which
investigates substances, any more than to any other science, to know
about these topics.-And, at the same time, in what way can there be
a science of the first principles? For we are aware even now what
each of them in fact is (at least even other sciences use them as
familiar); but if there is a demonstrative science which deals with
them, there will have to be an underlying kind, and some of them must
be demonstrable attributes and others must be axioms (for it is impossible
that there should be demonstration about all of them); for the demonstration
must start from certain premisses and be about a certain subject and
prove certain attributes. Therefore it follows that all attributes
that are proved must belong to a single class; for all demonstrative
sciences use the axioms. 

"But if the science of substance and the science which deals with
the axioms are different, which of them is by nature more authoritative
and prior? The axioms are most universal and are principles of all
things. And if it is not the business of the philosopher, to whom
else will it belong to inquire what is true and what is untrue about
them? 

"(3) In general, do all substances fall under one science or under
more than one? If the latter, to what sort of substance is the present
science to be assigned?-On the other hand, it is not reasonable that
one science should deal with all. For then there would be one demonstrative
science dealing with all attributes. For ever demonstrative science
investigates with regard to some subject its essential attributes,
starting from the common beliefs. Therefore to investigate the essential
attributes of one class of things, starting from one set of beliefs,
is the business of one science. For the subject belongs to one science,
and the premisses belong to one, whether to the same or to another;
so that the attributes do so too, whether they are investigated by
these sciences or by one compounded out of them. 

"(5) Further, does our investigation deal with substances alone or
also with their attributes? I mean for instance, if the solid is a
substance and so are lines and planes, is it the business of the same
science to know these and to know the attributes of each of these
classes (the attributes about which the mathematical sciences offer
proofs), or of a different science? If of the same, the science of
substance also must be a demonstrative science, but it is thought
that there is no demonstration of the essence of things. And if of
another, what will be the science that investigates the attributes
of substance? This is a very difficult question. 

"(4) Further, must we say that sensible substances alone exist, or
that there are others besides these? And are substances of one kind
or are there in fact several kinds of substances, as those say who
assert the existence both of the Forms and of the intermediates, with
which they say the mathematical sciences deal?-The sense in which
we say the Forms are both causes and self-dependent substances has
been explained in our first remarks about them; while the theory presents
difficulties in many ways, the most paradoxical thing of all is the
statement that there are certain things besides those in the material
universe, and that these are the same as sensible things except that
they are eternal while the latter are perishable. For they say there
is a man-himself and a horse-itself and health-itself, with no further
qualification,-a procedure like that of the people who said there
are gods, but in human form. For they were positing nothing but eternal
men, nor are the Platonists making the Forms anything other than eternal
sensible things. 

"Further, if we are to posit besides the Forms and the sensibles the
intermediates between them, we shall have many difficulties. For clearly
on the same principle there will be lines besides the lines-themselves
and the sensible lines, and so with each of the other classes of things;
so that since astronomy is one of these mathematical sciences there
will also be a heaven besides the sensible heaven, and a sun and a
moon (and so with the other heavenly bodies) besides the sensible.
Yet how are we to believe in these things? It is not reasonable even
to suppose such a body immovable, but to suppose it moving is quite
impossible.-And similarly with the things of which optics and mathematical
harmonics treat; for these also cannot exist apart from the sensible
things, for the same reasons. For if there are sensible things and
sensations intermediate between Form and individual, evidently there
will also be animals intermediate between animals-themselves and the
perishable animals.-We might also raise the question, with reference
to which kind of existing things we must look for these sciences of
intermediates. If geometry is to differ from mensuration only in this,
that the latter deals with things that we perceive, and the former
with things that are not perceptible, evidently there will also be
a science other than medicine, intermediate between medical-science-itself
and this individual medical science, and so with each of the other
sciences. Yet how is this possible? There would have to be also healthy
things besides the perceptible healthy things and the healthy-itself.--And
at the same time not even this is true, that mensuration deals with
perceptible and perishable magnitudes; for then it would have perished
when they perished. 

"But on the other hand astronomy cannot be dealing with perceptible
magnitudes nor with this heaven above us. For neither are perceptible
lines such lines as the geometer speaks of (for no perceptible thing
is straight or round in the way in which he defines 'straight' and
'round'; for a hoop touches a straight edge not at a point, but as
Protagoras used to say it did, in his refutation of the geometers),
nor are the movements and spiral orbits in the heavens like those
of which astronomy treats, nor have geometrical points the same nature
as the actual stars.-Now there are some who say that these so-called
intermediates between the Forms and the perceptible things exist,
not apart from the perceptible things, however, but in these; the
impossible results of this view would take too long to enumerate,
but it is enough to consider even such points as the following:-It
is not reasonable that this should be so only in the case of these
intermediates, but clearly the Forms also might be in the perceptible
things; for both statements are parts of the same theory. Further,
it follows from this theory that there are two solids in the same
place, and that the intermediates are not immovable, since they are
in the moving perceptible things. And in general to what purpose would
one suppose them to exist indeed, but to exist in perceptible things?
For the same paradoxical results will follow which we have already
mentioned; there will be a heaven besides the heaven, only it will
be not apart but in the same place; which is still more impossible.

Part 3 "

"(6) Apart from the great difficulty of stating the case truly with
regard to these matters, it is very hard to say, with regard to the
first principles, whether it is the genera that should be taken as
elements and principles, or rather the primary constituents of a thing;
e.g. it is the primary parts of which articulate sounds consist that
are thought to be elements and principles of articulate sound, not
the common genus-articulate sound; and we give the name of 'elements'
to those geometrical propositions, the proofs of which are implied
in the proofs of the others, either of all or of most. Further, both
those who say there are several elements of corporeal things and those
who say there is one, say the parts of which bodies are compounded
and consist are principles; e.g. Empedocles says fire and water and
the rest are the constituent elements of things, but does not describe
these as genera of existing things. Besides this, if we want to examine
the nature of anything else, we examine the parts of which, e.g. a
bed consists and how they are put together, and then we know its nature.

"To judge from these arguments, then, the principles of things would
not be the genera; but if we know each thing by its definition, and
the genera are the principles or starting-points of definitions, the
genera must also be the principles of definable things. And if to
get the knowledge of the species according to which things are named
is to get the knowledge of things, the genera are at least starting-points
of the species. And some also of those who say unity or being, or
the great and the small, are elements of things, seem to treat them
as genera. 

"But, again, it is not possible to describe the principles in both
ways. For the formula of the essence is one; but definition by genera
will be different from that which states the constituent parts of
a thing. 

"(7) Besides this, even if the genera are in the highest degree principles,
should one regard the first of the genera as principles, or those
which are predicated directly of the individuals? This also admits
of dispute. For if the universals are always more of the nature of
principles, evidently the uppermost of the genera are the principles;
for these are predicated of all things. There will, then, be as many
principles of things as there are primary genera, so that both being
and unity will be principles and substances; for these are most of
all predicated of all existing things. But it is not possible that
either unity or being should be a single genus of things; for the
differentiae of any genus must each of them both have being and be
one, but it is not possible for the genus taken apart from its species
(any more than for the species of the genus) to be predicated of its
proper differentiae; so that if unity or being is a genus, no differentia
will either have being or be one. But if unity and being are not genera,
neither will they be principles, if the genera are the principles.
Again, the intermediate kinds, in whose nature the differentiae are
included, will on this theory be genera, down to the indivisible species;
but as it is, some are thought to be genera and others are not thought
to be so. Besides this, the differentiae are principles even more
than the genera; and if these also are principles, there comes to
be practically an infinite number of principles, especially if we
suppose the highest genus to be a principle.-But again, if unity is
more of the nature of a principle, and the indivisible is one, and
everything indivisible is so either in quantity or in species, and
that which is so in species is the prior, and genera are divisible
into species for man is not the genus of individual men), that which
is predicated directly of the individuals will have more unity.-Further,
in the case of things in which the distinction of prior and posterior
is present, that which is predicable of these things cannot be something
apart from them (e.g. if two is the first of numbers, there will not
be a Number apart from the kinds of numbers; and similarly there will
not be a Figure apart from the kinds of figures; and if the genera
of these things do not exist apart from the species, the genera of
other things will scarcely do so; for genera of these things are thought
to exist if any do). But among the individuals one is not prior and
another posterior. Further, where one thing is better and another
worse, the better is always prior; so that of these also no genus
can exist. From these considerations, then, the species predicated
of individuals seem to be principles rather than the genera. But again,
it is not easy to say in what sense these are to be taken as principles.
For the principle or cause must exist alongside of the things of which
it is the principle, and must be capable of existing in separation
from them; but for what reason should we suppose any such thing to
exist alongside of the individual, except that it is predicated universally
and of all? But if this is the reason, the things that are more universal
must be supposed to be more of the nature of principles; so that the
highest genera would be the principles. 

Part 4 "

"(8) There is a difficulty connected with these, the hardest of all
and the most necessary to examine, and of this the discussion now
awaits us. If, on the one hand, there is nothing apart from individual
things, and the individuals are infinite in number, how then is it
possible to get knowledge of the infinite individuals? For all things
that we come to know, we come to know in so far as they have some
unity and identity, and in so far as some attribute belongs to them
universally. 

"But if this is necessary, and there must be something apart from
the individuals, it will be necessary that the genera exist apart
from the individuals, either the lowest or the highest genera; but
we found by discussion just now that this is impossible.

"Further, if we admit in the fullest sense that something exists apart
from the concrete thing, whenever something is predicated of the matter,
must there, if there is something apart, be something apart from each
set of individuals, or from some and not from others, or from none?
(A) If there is nothing apart from individuals, there will be no object
of thought, but all things will be objects of sense, and there will
not be knowledge of anything, unless we say that sensation is knowledge.
Further, nothing will be eternal or unmovable; for all perceptible
things perish and are in movement. But if there is nothing eternal,
neither can there be a process of coming to be; for there must be
something that comes to be, i.e. from which something comes to be,
and the ultimate term in this series cannot have come to be, since
the series has a limit and since nothing can come to be out of that
which is not. Further, if generation and movement exist there must
also be a limit; for no movement is infinite, but every movement has
an end, and that which is incapable of completing its coming to be
cannot be in process of coming to be; and that which has completed
its coming to be must he as soon as it has come to be. Further, since
the matter exists, because it is ungenerated, it is a fortiori reasonable
that the substance or essence, that which the matter is at any time
coming to be, should exist; for if neither essence nor matter is to
be, nothing will be at all, and since this is impossible there must
be something besides the concrete thing, viz. the shape or form.

"But again (B) if we are to suppose this, it is hard to say in which
cases we are to suppose it and in which not. For evidently it is not
possible to suppose it in all cases; we could not suppose that there
is a house besides the particular houses.-Besides this, will the substance
of all the individuals, e.g. of all men, be one? This is paradoxical,
for all the things whose substance is one are one. But are the substances
many and different? This also is unreasonable.-At the same time, how
does the matter become each of the individuals, and how is the concrete
thing these two elements? 

"(9) Again, one might ask the following question also about the first
principles. If they are one in kind only, nothing will be numerically
one, not even unity-itself and being-itself; and how will knowing
exist, if there is not to be something common to a whole set of individuals?

"But if there is a common element which is numerically one, and each
of the principles is one, and the principles are not as in the case
of perceptible things different for different things (e.g. since this
particular syllable is the same in kind whenever it occurs, the elements
it are also the same in kind; only in kind, for these also, like the
syllable, are numerically different in different contexts),-if it
is not like this but the principles of things are numerically one,
there will be nothing else besides the elements (for there is no difference
of meaning between 'numerically one' and 'individual'; for this is
just what we mean by the individual-the numerically one, and by the
universal we mean that which is predicable of the individuals). Therefore
it will be just as if the elements of articulate sound were limited
in number; all the language in the world would be confined to the
ABC, since there could not be two or more letters of the same kind.

"(10) One difficulty which is as great as any has been neglected both
by modern philosophers and by their predecessors-whether the principles
of perishable and those of imperishable things are the same or different.
If they are the same, how are some things perishable and others imperishable,
and for what reason? The school of Hesiod and all the theologians
thought only of what was plausible to themselves, and had no regard
to us. For, asserting the first principles to be gods and born of
gods, they say that the beings which did not taste of nectar and ambrosia
became mortal; and clearly they are using words which are familiar
to themselves, yet what they have said about the very application
of these causes is above our comprehension. For if the gods taste
of nectar and ambrosia for their pleasure, these are in no wise the
causes of their existence; and if they taste them to maintain their
existence, how can gods who need food be eternal?-But into the subtleties
of the mythologists it is not worth our while to inquire seriously;
those, however, who use the language of proof we must cross-examine
and ask why, after all, things which consist of the same elements
are, some of them, eternal in nature, while others perish. Since these
philosophers mention no cause, and it is unreasonable that things
should be as they say, evidently the principles or causes of things
cannot be the same. Even the man whom one might suppose to speak most
consistently-Empedocles, even he has made the same mistake; for he
maintains that strife is a principle that causes destruction, but
even strife would seem no less to produce everything, except the One;
for all things excepting God proceed from strife. At least he says:-
"

"From which all that was and is and will be hereafter- 

"Trees, and men and women, took their growth, 

"And beasts and birds and water-nourished fish, 

"And long-aged gods. "

"The implication is evident even apart from these words; for if strife
had not been present in things, all things would have been one, according
to him; for when they have come together, 'then strife stood outermost.'
Hence it also follows on his theory that God most blessed is less
wise than all others; for he does not know all the elements; for he
has in him no strife, and knowledge is of the like by the like. 'For
by earth,' he says, "

"we see earth, by water water, 

"By ether godlike ether, by fire wasting fire, 

"Love by love, and strife by gloomy strife. "

But-and this is the point we started from this at least is evident,
that on his theory it follows that strife is as much the cause of
existence as of destruction. And similarly love is not specially the
cause of existence; for in collecting things into the One it destroys
all other things. And at the same time Empedocles mentions no cause
of the change itself, except that things are so by nature.

"But when strife at last waxed great in the limbs of the

"Sphere, 

"And sprang to assert its rights as the time was fulfilled

"Which is fixed for them in turn by a mighty oath. "

"This implies that change was necessary; but he shows no cause of
the necessity. But yet so far at least he alone speaks consistently;
for he does not make some things perishable and others imperishable,
but makes all perishable except the elements. The difficulty we are
speaking of now is, why some things are perishable and others are
not, if they consist of the same principles. 

"Let this suffice as proof of the fact that the principles cannot
be the same. But if there are different principles, one difficulty
is whether these also will be imperishable or perishable. For if they
are perishable, evidently these also must consist of certain elements
(for all things that perish, perish by being resolved into the elements
of which they consist); so that it follows that prior to the principles
there are other principles. But this is impossible, whether the process
has a limit or proceeds to infinity. Further, how will perishable
things exist, if their principles are to be annulled? But if the principles
are imperishable, why will things composed of some imperishable principles
be perishable, while those composed of the others are imperishable?
This is not probable, but is either impossible or needs much proof.
Further, no one has even tried to maintain different principles; they
maintain the same principles for all things. But they swallow the
difficulty we stated first as if they took it to be something trifling.

"(11) The inquiry that is both the hardest of all and the most necessary
for knowledge of the truth is whether being and unity are the substances
of things, and whether each of them, without being anything else,
is being or unity respectively, or we must inquire what being and
unity are, with the implication that they have some other underlying
nature. For some people think they are of the former, others think
they are of the latter character. Plato and the Pythagoreans thought
being and unity were nothing else, but this was their nature, their
essence being just unity and being. But the natural philosophers take
a different line; e.g. Empedocles-as though reducing to something
more intelligible-says what unity is; for he would seem to say it
is love: at least, this is for all things the cause of their being
one. Others say this unity and being, of which things consist and
have been made, is fire, and others say it is air. A similar view
is expressed by those who make the elements more than one; for these
also must say that unity and being are precisely all the things which
they say are principles. 

"(A) If we do not suppose unity and being to be substances, it follows
that none of the other universals is a substance; for these are most
universal of all, and if there is no unity itself or being-itself,
there will scarcely be in any other case anything apart from what
are called the individuals. Further, if unity is not a substance,
evidently number also will not exist as an entity separate from the
individual things; for number is units, and the unit is precisely
a certain kind of one. 

"But (B) if there is a unity-itself and a being itself, unity and
being must be their substance; for it is not something else that is
predicated universally of the things that are and are one, but just
unity and being. But if there is to be a being-itself and a unity-itself,
there is much difficulty in seeing how there will be anything else
besides these,-I mean, how things will be more than one in number.
For what is different from being does not exist, so that it necessarily
follows, according to the argument of Parmenides, that all things
that are are one and this is being. 

"There are objections to both views. For whether unity is not a substance
or there is a unity-itself, number cannot be a substance. We have
already said why this result follows if unity is not a substance;
and if it is, the same difficulty arises as arose with regard to being.
For whence is there to be another one besides unity-itself? It must
be not-one; but all things are either one or many, and of the many
each is one. 

"Further, if unity-itself is indivisible, according to Zeno's postulate
it will be nothing. For that which neither when added makes a thing
greater nor when subtracted makes it less, he asserts to have no being,
evidently assuming that whatever has being is a spatial magnitude.
And if it is a magnitude, it is corporeal; for the corporeal has being
in every dimension, while the other objects of mathematics, e.g. a
plane or a line, added in one way will increase what they are added
to, but in another way will not do so, and a point or a unit does
so in no way. But, since his theory is of a low order, and an indivisible
thing can exist in such a way as to have a defence even against him
(for the indivisible when added will make the number, though not the
size, greater),-yet how can a magnitude proceed from one such indivisible
or from many? It is like saying that the line is made out of points.

"But even if ore supposes the case to be such that, as some say, number
proceeds from unity-itself and something else which is not one, none
the less we must inquire why and how the product will be sometimes
a number and sometimes a magnitude, if the not-one was inequality
and was the same principle in either case. For it is not evident how
magnitudes could proceed either from the one and this principle, or
from some number and this principle. 

Part 5 "

"(14) A question connected with these is whether numbers and bodies
and planes and points are substances of a kind, or not. If they are
not, it baffles us to say what being is and what the substances of
things are. For modifications and movements and relations and dispositions
and ratios do not seem to indicate the substance of anything; for
all are predicated of a subject, and none is a 'this'. And as to the
things which might seem most of all to indicate substance, water and
earth and fire and air, of which composite bodies consist, heat and
cold and the like are modifications of these, not substances, and
the body which is thus modified alone persists as something real and
as a substance. But, on the other hand, the body is surely less of
a substance than the surface, and the surface than the line, and the
line than the unit and the point. For the body is bounded by these;
and they are thought to be capable of existing without body, but body
incapable of existing without these. This is why, while most of the
philosophers and the earlier among them thought that substance and
being were identical with body, and that all other things were modifications
of this, so that the first principles of the bodies were the first
principles of being, the more recent and those who were held to be
wiser thought numbers were the first principles. As we said, then,
if these are not substance, there is no substance and no being at
all; for the accidents of these it cannot be right to call beings.

"But if this is admitted, that lines and points are substance more
than bodies, but we do not see to what sort of bodies these could
belong (for they cannot be in perceptible bodies), there can be no
substance.-Further, these are all evidently divisions of body,-one
in breadth, another in depth, another in length. Besides this, no
sort of shape is present in the solid more than any other; so that
if the Hermes is not in the stone, neither is the half of the cube
in the cube as something determinate; therefore the surface is not
in it either; for if any sort of surface were in it, the surface which
marks off the half of the cube would be in it too. And the same account
applies to the line and to the point and the unit. Therefore, if on
the one hand body is in the highest degree substance, and on the other
hand these things are so more than body, but these are not even instances
of substance, it baffles us to say what being is and what the substance
of things is.-For besides what has been said, the questions of generation
and instruction confront us with further paradoxes. For if substance,
not having existed before, now exists, or having existed before, afterwards
does not exist, this change is thought to be accompanied by a process
of becoming or perishing; but points and lines and surfaces cannot
be in process either of becoming or of perishing, when they at one
time exist and at another do not. For when bodies come into contact
or are divided, their boundaries simultaneously become one in the
one case when they touch, and two in the other-when they are divided;
so that when they have been put together one boundary does not exist
but has perished, and when they have been divided the boundaries exist
which before did not exist (for it cannot be said that the point,
which is indivisible, was divided into two). And if the boundaries
come into being and cease to be, from what do they come into being?
A similar account may also be given of the 'now' in time; for this
also cannot be in process of coming into being or of ceasing to be,
but yet seems to be always different, which shows that it is not a
substance. And evidently the same is true of points and lines and
planes; for the same argument applies, since they are all alike either
limits or divisions. 

Part 6 "

"In general one might raise the question why after all, besides perceptible
things and the intermediates, we have to look for another class of
things, i.e. the Forms which we posit. If it is for this reason, because
the objects of mathematics, while they differ from the things in this
world in some other respect, differ not at all in that there are many
of the same kind, so that their first principles cannot be limited
in number (just as the elements of all the language in this sensible
world are not limited in number, but in kind, unless one takes the
elements of this individual syllable or of this individual articulate
sound-whose elements will be limited even in number; so is it also
in the case of the intermediates; for there also the members of the
same kind are infinite in number), so that if there are not-besides
perceptible and mathematical objects-others such as some maintain
the Forms to be, there will be no substance which is one in number,
but only in kind, nor will the first principles of things be determinate
in number, but only in kind:-if then this must be so, the Forms also
must therefore be held to exist. Even if those who support this view
do not express it articulately, still this is what they mean, and
they must be maintaining the Forms just because each of the Forms
is a substance and none is by accident. 

"But if we are to suppose both that the Forms exist and that the principles
are one in number, not in kind, we have mentioned the impossible results
that necessarily follow. 

"(13) Closely connected with this is the question whether the elements
exist potentially or in some other manner. If in some other way, there
will be something else prior to the first principles; for the potency
is prior to the actual cause, and it is not necessary for everything
potential to be actual.-But if the elements exist potentially, it
is possible that everything that is should not be. For even that which
is not yet is capable of being; for that which is not comes to be,
but nothing that is incapable of being comes to be. 

"(12) We must not only raise these questions about the first principles,
but also ask whether they are universal or what we call individuals.
If they are universal, they will not be substances; for everything
that is common indicates not a 'this' but a 'such', but substance
is a 'this'. And if we are to be allowed to lay it down that a common
predicate is a 'this' and a single thing, Socrates will be several
animals-himself and 'man' and 'animal', if each of these indicates
a 'this' and a single thing. 

"If, then, the principles are universals, these universal. Therefore
if there is to be results follow; if they are not universals but of
knowledge of the principles there must be the nature of individuals,
they will not be other principles prior to them, namely those knowable;
for the knowledge of anything is that are universally predicated of
them. 



BOOK IV

Part 1 

"

"THERE is a science which investigates being as being and the attributes
which belong to this in virtue of its own nature. Now this is not
the same as any of the so-called special sciences; for none of these
others treats universally of being as being. They cut off a part of
being and investigate the attribute of this part; this is what the
mathematical sciences for instance do. Now since we are seeking the
first principles and the highest causes, clearly there must be some
thing to which these belong in virtue of its own nature. If then those
who sought the elements of existing things were seeking these same
principles, it is necessary that the elements must be elements of
being not by accident but just because it is being. Therefore it is
of being as being that we also must grasp the first causes.
"

Part 2 

"There are many senses in which a thing may be said to 'be', but all
that 'is' is related to one central point, one definite kind of thing,
and is not said to 'be' by a mere ambiguity. Everything which is healthy
is related to health, one thing in the sense that it preserves health,
another in the sense that it produces it, another in the sense that
it is a symptom of health, another because it is capable of it. And
that which is medical is relative to the medical art, one thing being
called medical because it possesses it, another because it is naturally
adapted to it, another because it is a function of the medical art.
And we shall find other words used similarly to these. So, too, there
are many senses in which a thing is said to be, but all refer to one
starting-point; some things are said to be because they are substances,
others because they are affections of substance, others because they
are a process towards substance, or destructions or privations or
qualities of substance, or productive or generative of substance,
or of things which are relative to substance, or negations of one
of these thing of substance itself. It is for this reason that we
say even of non-being that it is nonbeing. As, then, there is one
science which deals with all healthy things, the same applies in the
other cases also. For not only in the case of things which have one
common notion does the investigation belong to one science, but also
in the case of things which are related to one common nature; for
even these in a sense have one common notion. It is clear then that
it is the work of one science also to study the things that are, qua
being.-But everywhere science deals chiefly with that which is primary,
and on which the other things depend, and in virtue of which they
get their names. If, then, this is substance, it will be of substances
that the philosopher must grasp the principles and the causes.

"Now for each one class of things, as there is one perception, so
there is one science, as for instance grammar, being one science,
investigates all articulate sounds. Hence to investigate all the species
of being qua being is the work of a science which is generically one,
and to investigate the several species is the work of the specific
parts of the science. 

"If, now, being and unity are the same and are one thing in the sense
that they are implied in one another as principle and cause are, not
in the sense that they are explained by the same definition (though
it makes no difference even if we suppose them to be like that-in
fact this would even strengthen our case); for 'one man' and 'man'
are the same thing, and so are 'existent man' and 'man', and the doubling
of the words in 'one man and one existent man' does not express anything
different (it is clear that the two things are not separated either
in coming to be or in ceasing to be); and similarly 'one existent
man' adds nothing to 'existent man', and that it is obvious that the
addition in these cases means the same thing, and unity is nothing
apart from being; and if, further, the substance of each thing is
one in no merely accidental way, and similarly is from its very nature
something that is:-all this being so, there must be exactly as many
species of being as of unity. And to investigate the essence of these
is the work of a science which is generically one-I mean, for instance,
the discussion of the same and the similar and the other concepts
of this sort; and nearly all contraries may be referred to this origin;
let us take them as having been investigated in the 'Selection of
Contraries'. 

"And there are as many parts of philosophy as there are kinds of substance,
so that there must necessarily be among them a first philosophy and
one which follows this. For being falls immediately into genera; for
which reason the sciences too will correspond to these genera. For
the philosopher is like the mathematician, as that word is used; for
mathematics also has parts, and there is a first and a second science
and other successive ones within the sphere of mathematics.

"Now since it is the work of one science to investigate opposites,
and plurality is opposed to unity-and it belongs to one science to
investigate the negation and the privation because in both cases we
are really investigating the one thing of which the negation or the
privation is a negation or privation (for we either say simply that
that thing is not present, or that it is not present in some particular
class; in the latter case difference is present over and above what
is implied in negation; for negation means just the absence of the
thing in question, while in privation there is also employed an underlying
nature of which the privation is asserted):-in view of all these facts,
the contraries of the concepts we named above, the other and the dissimilar
and the unequal, and everything else which is derived either from
these or from plurality and unity, must fall within the province of
the science above named. And contrariety is one of these concepts;
for contrariety is a kind of difference, and difference is a kind
of otherness. Therefore, since there are many senses in which a thing
is said to be one, these terms also will have many senses, but yet
it belongs to one science to know them all; for a term belongs to
different sciences not if it has different senses, but if it has not
one meaning and its definitions cannot be referred to one central
meaning. And since all things are referred to that which is primary,
as for instance all things which are called one are referred to the
primary one, we must say that this holds good also of the same and
the other and of contraries in general; so that after distinguishing
the various senses of each, we must then explain by reference to what
is primary in the case of each of the predicates in question, saying
how they are related to it; for some will be called what they are
called because they possess it, others because they produce it, and
others in other such ways. 

"It is evident, then, that it belongs to one science to be able to
give an account of these concepts as well as of substance (this was
one of the questions in our book of problems), and that it is the
function of the philosopher to be able to investigate all things.
For if it is not the function of the philosopher, who is it who will
inquire whether Socrates and Socrates seated are the same thing, or
whether one thing has one contrary, or what contrariety is, or how
many meanings it has? And similarly with all other such questions.
Since, then, these are essential modifications of unity qua unity
and of being qua being, not qua numbers or lines or fire, it is clear
that it belongs to this science to investigate both the essence of
these concepts and their properties. And those who study these properties
err not by leaving the sphere of philosophy, but by forgetting that
substance, of which they have no correct idea, is prior to these other
things. For number qua number has peculiar attributes, such as oddness
and evenness, commensurability and equality, excess and defect, and
these belong to numbers either in themselves or in relation to one
another. And similarly the solid and the motionless and that which
is in motion and the weightless and that which has weight have other
peculiar properties. So too there are certain properties peculiar
to being as such, and it is about these that the philosopher has to
investigate the truth.-An indication of this may be mentioned: dialecticians
and sophists assume the same guise as the philosopher, for sophistic
is Wisdom which exists only in semblance, and dialecticians embrace
all things in their dialectic, and being is common to all things;
but evidently their dialectic embraces these subjects because these
are proper to philosophy.-For sophistic and dialectic turn on the
same class of things as philosophy, but this differs from dialectic
in the nature of the faculty required and from sophistic in respect
of the purpose of the philosophic life. Dialectic is merely critical
where philosophy claims to know, and sophistic is what appears to
be philosophy but is not. 

"Again, in the list of contraries one of the two columns is privative,
and all contraries are reducible to being and non-being, and to unity
and plurality, as for instance rest belongs to unity and movement
to plurality. And nearly all thinkers agree that being and substance
are composed of contraries; at least all name contraries as their
first principles-some name odd and even, some hot and cold, some limit
and the unlimited, some love and strife. And all the others as well
are evidently reducible to unity and plurality (this reduction we
must take for granted), and the principles stated by other thinkers
fall entirely under these as their genera. It is obvious then from
these considerations too that it belongs to one science to examine
being qua being. For all things are either contraries or composed
of contraries, and unity and plurality are the starting-points of
all contraries. And these belong to one science, whether they have
or have not one single meaning. Probably the truth is that they have
not; yet even if 'one' has several meanings, the other meanings will
be related to the primary meaning (and similarly in the case of the
contraries), even if being or unity is not a universal and the same
in every instance or is not separable from the particular instances
(as in fact it probably is not; the unity is in some cases that of
common reference, in some cases that of serial succession). And for
this reason it does not belong to the geometer to inquire what is
contrariety or completeness or unity or being or the same or the other,
but only to presuppose these concepts and reason from this starting-point.--Obviously
then it is the work of one science to examine being qua being, and
the attributes which belong to it qua being, and the same science
will examine not only substances but also their attributes, both those
above named and the concepts 'prior' and 'posterior', 'genus' and
'species', 'whole' and 'part', and the others of this sort.

Part 3 "

"We must state whether it belongs to one or to different sciences
to inquire into the truths which are in mathematics called axioms,
and into substance. Evidently, the inquiry into these also belongs
to one science, and that the science of the philosopher; for these
truths hold good for everything that is, and not for some special
genus apart from others. And all men use them, because they are true
of being qua being and each genus has being. But men use them just
so far as to satisfy their purposes; that is, as far as the genus
to which their demonstrations refer extends. Therefore since these
truths clearly hold good for all things qua being (for this is what
is common to them), to him who studies being qua being belongs the
inquiry into these as well. And for this reason no one who is conducting
a special inquiry tries to say anything about their truth or falsity,-neither
the geometer nor the arithmetician. Some natural philosophers indeed
have done so, and their procedure was intelligible enough; for they
thought that they alone were inquiring about the whole of nature and
about being. But since there is one kind of thinker who is above even
the natural philosopher (for nature is only one particular genus of
being), the discussion of these truths also will belong to him whose
inquiry is universal and deals with primary substance. Physics also
is a kind of Wisdom, but it is not the first kind.-And the attempts
of some of those who discuss the terms on which truth should be accepted,
are due to a want of training in logic; for they should know these
things already when they come to a special study, and not be inquiring
into them while they are listening to lectures on it. 

"Evidently then it belongs to the philosopher, i.e. to him who is
studying the nature of all substance, to inquire also into the principles
of syllogism. But he who knows best about each genus must be able
to state the most certain principles of his subject, so that he whose
subject is existing things qua existing must be able to state the
most certain principles of all things. This is the philosopher, and
the most certain principle of all is that regarding which it is impossible
to be mistaken; for such a principle must be both the best known (for
all men may be mistaken about things which they do not know), and
non-hypothetical. For a principle which every one must have who understands
anything that is, is not a hypothesis; and that which every one must
know who knows anything, he must already have when he comes to a special
study. Evidently then such a principle is the most certain of all;
which principle this is, let us proceed to say. It is, that the same
attribute cannot at the same time belong and not belong to the same
subject and in the same respect; we must presuppose, to guard against
dialectical objections, any further qualifications which might be
added. This, then, is the most certain of all principles, since it
answers to the definition given above. For it is impossible for any
one to believe the same thing to be and not to be, as some think Heraclitus
says. For what a man says, he does not necessarily believe; and if
it is impossible that contrary attributes should belong at the same
time to the same subject (the usual qualifications must be presupposed
in this premiss too), and if an opinion which contradicts another
is contrary to it, obviously it is impossible for the same man at
the same time to believe the same thing to be and not to be; for if
a man were mistaken on this point he would have contrary opinions
at the same time. It is for this reason that all who are carrying
out a demonstration reduce it to this as an ultimate belief; for this
is naturally the starting-point even for all the other axioms.

Part 4 "

"There are some who, as we said, both themselves assert that it is
possible for the same thing to be and not to be, and say that people
can judge this to be the case. And among others many writers about
nature use this language. But we have now posited that it is impossible
for anything at the same time to be and not to be, and by this means
have shown that this is the most indisputable of all principles.-Some
indeed demand that even this shall be demonstrated, but this they
do through want of education, for not to know of what things one should
demand demonstration, and of what one should not, argues want of education.
For it is impossible that there should be demonstration of absolutely
everything (there would be an infinite regress, so that there would
still be no demonstration); but if there are things of which one should
not demand demonstration, these persons could not say what principle
they maintain to be more self-evident than the present one.

"We can, however, demonstrate negatively even that this view is impossible,
if our opponent will only say something; and if he says nothing, it
is absurd to seek to give an account of our views to one who cannot
give an account of anything, in so far as he cannot do so. For such
a man, as such, is from the start no better than a vegetable. Now
negative demonstration I distinguish from demonstration proper, because
in a demonstration one might be thought to be begging the question,
but if another person is responsible for the assumption we shall have
negative proof, not demonstration. The starting-point for all such
arguments is not the demand that our opponent shall say that something
either is or is not (for this one might perhaps take to be a begging
of the question), but that he shall say something which is significant
both for himself and for another; for this is necessary, if he really
is to say anything. For, if he means nothing, such a man will not
be capable of reasoning, either with himself or with another. But
if any one grants this, demonstration will be possible; for we shall
already have something definite. The person responsible for the proof,
however, is not he who demonstrates but he who listens; for while
disowning reason he listens to reason. And again he who admits this
has admitted that something is true apart from demonstration (so that
not everything will be 'so and not so'). 

"First then this at least is obviously true, that the word 'be' or
'not be' has a definite meaning, so that not everything will be 'so
and not so'. Again, if 'man' has one meaning, let this be 'two-footed
animal'; by having one meaning I understand this:-if 'man' means 'X',
then if A is a man 'X' will be what 'being a man' means for him. (It
makes no difference even if one were to say a word has several meanings,
if only they are limited in number; for to each definition there might
be assigned a different word. For instance, we might say that 'man'
has not one meaning but several, one of which would have one definition,
viz. 'two-footed animal', while there might be also several other
definitions if only they were limited in number; for a peculiar name
might be assigned to each of the definitions. If, however, they were
not limited but one were to say that the word has an infinite number
of meanings, obviously reasoning would be impossible; for not to have
one meaning is to have no meaning, and if words have no meaning our
reasoning with one another, and indeed with ourselves, has been annihilated;
for it is impossible to think of anything if we do not think of one
thing; but if this is possible, one name might be assigned to this
thing.) 

"Let it be assumed then, as was said at the beginning, that the name
has a meaning and has one meaning; it is impossible, then, that 'being
a man' should mean precisely 'not being a man', if 'man' not only
signifies something about one subject but also has one significance
(for we do not identify 'having one significance' with 'signifying
something about one subject', since on that assumption even 'musical'
and 'white' and 'man' would have had one significance, so that all
things would have been one; for they would all have had the same significance).

"And it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing, except
in virtue of an ambiguity, just as if one whom we call 'man', others
were to call 'not-man'; but the point in question is not this, whether
the same thing can at the same time be and not be a man in name, but
whether it can in fact. Now if 'man' and 'not-man' mean nothing different,
obviously 'not being a man' will mean nothing different from 'being
a man'; so that 'being a man' will be 'not being a man'; for they
will be one. For being one means this-being related as 'raiment' and
'dress' are, if their definition is one. And if 'being a man' and
'being a not-man' are to be one, they must mean one thing. But it
was shown earlier' that they mean different things.-Therefore, if
it is true to say of anything that it is a man, it must be a two-footed
animal (for this was what 'man' meant); and if this is necessary,
it is impossible that the same thing should not at that time be a
two-footed animal; for this is what 'being necessary' means-that it
is impossible for the thing not to be. It is, then, impossible that
it should be at the same time true to say the same thing is a man
and is not a man. 

"The same account holds good with regard to 'not being a man', for
'being a man' and 'being a not-man' mean different things, since even
'being white' and 'being a man' are different; for the former terms
are much more different so that they must a fortiori mean different
things. And if any one says that 'white' means one and the same thing
as 'man', again we shall say the same as what was said before, that
it would follow that all things are one, and not only opposites. But
if this is impossible, then what we have maintained will follow, if
our opponent will only answer our question. 

"And if, when one asks the question simply, he adds the contradictories,
he is not answering the question. For there is nothing to prevent
the same thing from being both a man and white and countless other
things: but still, if one asks whether it is or is not true to say
that this is a man, our opponent must give an answer which means one
thing, and not add that 'it is also white and large'. For, besides
other reasons, it is impossible to enumerate its accidental attributes,
which are infinite in number; let him, then, enumerate either all
or none. Similarly, therefore, even if the same thing is a thousand
times a man and a not-man, he must not, in answering the question
whether this is a man, add that it is also at the same time a not-man,
unless he is bound to add also all the other accidents, all that the
subject is or is not; and if he does this, he is not observing the
rules of argument. 

"And in general those who say this do away with substance and essence.
For they must say that all attributes are accidents, and that there
is no such thing as 'being essentially a man' or 'an animal'. For
if there is to be any such thing as 'being essentially a man' this
will not be 'being a not-man' or 'not being a man' (yet these are
negations of it); for there was one thing which it meant, and this
was the substance of something. And denoting the substance of a thing
means that the essence of the thing is nothing else. But if its being
essentially a man is to be the same as either being essentially a
not-man or essentially not being a man, then its essence will be something
else. Therefore our opponents must say that there cannot be such a
definition of anything, but that all attributes are accidental; for
this is the distinction between substance and accident-'white' is
accidental to man, because though he is white, whiteness is not his
essence. But if all statements are accidental, there will be nothing
primary about which they are made, if the accidental always implies
predication about a subject. The predication, then, must go on ad
infinitum. But this is impossible; for not even more than two terms
can be combined in accidental predication. For (1) an accident is
not an accident of an accident, unless it be because both are accidents
of the same subject. I mean, for instance, that the white is musical
and the latter is white, only because both are accidental to man.
But (2) Socrates is musical, not in this sense, that both terms are
accidental to something else. Since then some predicates are accidental
in this and some in that sense, (a) those which are accidental in
the latter sense, in which white is accidental to Socrates, cannot
form an infinite series in the upward direction; e.g. Socrates the
white has not yet another accident; for no unity can be got out of
such a sum. Nor again (b) will 'white' have another term accidental
to it, e.g. 'musical'. For this is no more accidental to that than
that is to this; and at the same time we have drawn the distinction,
that while some predicates are accidental in this sense, others are
so in the sense in which 'musical' is accidental to Socrates; and
the accident is an accident of an accident not in cases of the latter
kind, but only in cases of the other kind, so that not all terms will
be accidental. There must, then, even so be something which denotes
substance. And if this is so, it has been shown that contradictories
cannot be predicated at the same time. 

"Again, if all contradictory statements are true of the same subject
at the same time, evidently all things will be one. For the same thing
will be a trireme, a wall, and a man, if of everything it is possible
either to affirm or to deny anything (and this premiss must be accepted
by those who share the views of Protagoras). For if any one thinks
that the man is not a trireme, evidently he is not a trireme; so that
he also is a trireme, if, as they say, contradictory statements are
both true. And we thus get the doctrine of Anaxagoras, that all things
are mixed together; so that nothing really exists. They seem, then,
to be speaking of the indeterminate, and, while fancying themselves
to be speaking of being, they are speaking about non-being; for it
is that which exists potentially and not in complete reality that
is indeterminate. But they must predicate of every subject the affirmation
or the negation of every attribute. For it is absurd if of each subject
its own negation is to be predicable, while the negation of something
else which cannot be predicated of it is not to be predicable of it;
for instance, if it is true to say of a man that he is not a man,
evidently it is also true to say that he is either a trireme or not
a trireme. If, then, the affirmative can be predicated, the negative
must be predicable too; and if the affirmative is not predicable,
the negative, at least, will be more predicable than the negative
of the subject itself. If, then, even the latter negative is predicable,
the negative of 'trireme' will be also predicable; and, if this is
predicable, the affirmative will be so too. 

"Those, then, who maintain this view are driven to this conclusion,
and to the further conclusion that it is not necessary either to assert
or to deny. For if it is true that a thing is a man and a not-man,
evidently also it will be neither a man nor a not-man. For to the
two assertions there answer two negations, and if the former is treated
as a single proposition compounded out of two, the latter also is
a single proposition opposite to the former. 

"Again, either the theory is true in all cases, and a thing is both
white and not-white, and existent and non-existent, and all other
assertions and negations are similarly compatible or the theory is
true of some statements and not of others. And if not of all, the
exceptions will be contradictories of which admittedly only one is
true; but if of all, again either the negation will be true wherever
the assertion is, and the assertion true wherever the negation is,
or the negation will be true where the assertion is, but the assertion
not always true where the negation is. And (a) in the latter case
there will be something which fixedly is not, and this will be an
indisputable belief; and if non-being is something indisputable and
knowable, the opposite assertion will be more knowable. But (b) if
it is equally possible also to assert all that it is possible to deny,
one must either be saying what is true when one separates the predicates
(and says, for instance, that a thing is white, and again that it
is not-white), or not. And if (i) it is not true to apply the predicates
separately, our opponent is not saying what he professes to say, and
also nothing at all exists; but how could non-existent things speak
or walk, as he does? Also all things would on this view be one, as
has been already said, and man and God and trireme and their contradictories
will be the same. For if contradictories can be predicated alike of
each subject, one thing will in no wise differ from another; for if
it differ, this difference will be something true and peculiar to
it. And (ii) if one may with truth apply the predicates separately,
the above-mentioned result follows none the less, and, further, it
follows that all would then be right and all would be in error, and
our opponent himself confesses himself to be in error.-And at the
same time our discussion with him is evidently about nothing at all;
for he says nothing. For he says neither 'yes' nor 'no', but 'yes
and no'; and again he denies both of these and says 'neither yes nor
no'; for otherwise there would already be something definite.

"Again if when the assertion is true, the negation is false, and when
this is true, the affirmation is false, it will not be possible to
assert and deny the same thing truly at the same time. But perhaps
they might say this was the very question at issue. 

"Again, is he in error who judges either that the thing is so or that
it is not so, and is he right who judges both? If he is right, what
can they mean by saying that the nature of existing things is of this
kind? And if he is not right, but more right than he who judges in
the other way, being will already be of a definite nature, and this
will be true, and not at the same time also not true. But if all are
alike both wrong and right, one who is in this condition will not
be able either to speak or to say anything intelligible; for he says
at the same time both 'yes' and 'no.' And if he makes no judgement
but 'thinks' and 'does not think', indifferently, what difference
will there be between him and a vegetable?-Thus, then, it is in the
highest degree evident that neither any one of those who maintain
this view nor any one else is really in this position. For why does
a man walk to Megara and not stay at home, when he thinks he ought
to be walking there? Why does he not walk early some morning into
a well or over a precipice, if one happens to be in his way? Why do
we observe him guarding against this, evidently because he does not
think that falling in is alike good and not good? Evidently, then,
he judges one thing to be better and another worse. And if this is
so, he must also judge one thing to be a man and another to be not-a-man,
one thing to be sweet and another to be not-sweet. For he does not
aim at and judge all things alike, when, thinking it desirable to
drink water or to see a man, he proceeds to aim at these things; yet
he ought, if the same thing were alike a man and not-a-man. But, as
was said, there is no one who does not obviously avoid some things
and not others. Therefore, as it seems, all men make unqualified judgements,
if not about all things, still about what is better and worse. And
if this is not knowledge but opinion, they should be all the more
anxious about the truth, as a sick man should be more anxious about
his health than one who is healthy; for he who has opinions is, in
comparison with the man who knows, not in a healthy state as far as
the truth is concerned. 

"Again, however much all things may be 'so and not so', still there
is a more and a less in the nature of things; for we should not say
that two and three are equally even, nor is he who thinks four things
are five equally wrong with him who thinks they are a thousand. If
then they are not equally wrong, obviously one is less wrong and therefore
more right. If then that which has more of any quality is nearer the
norm, there must be some truth to which the more true is nearer. And
even if there is not, still there is already something better founded
and liker the truth, and we shall have got rid of the unqualified
doctrine which would prevent us from determining anything in our thought.

Part 5 "

"From the same opinion proceeds the doctrine of Protagoras, and both
doctrines must be alike true or alike untrue. For on the one hand,
if all opinions and appearances are true, all statements must be at
the same time true and false. For many men hold beliefs in which they
conflict with one another, and think those mistaken who have not the
same opinions as themselves; so that the same thing must both be and
not be. And on the other hand, if this is so, all opinions must be
true; for those who are mistaken and those who are right are opposed
to one another in their opinions; if, then, reality is such as the
view in question supposes, all will be right in their beliefs.

"Evidently, then, both doctrines proceed from the same way of thinking.
But the same method of discussion must not be used with all opponents;
for some need persuasion, and others compulsion. Those who have been
driven to this position by difficulties in their thinking can easily
be cured of their ignorance; for it is not their expressed argument
but their thought that one has to meet. But those who argue for the
sake of argument can be cured only by refuting the argument as expressed
in speech and in words. 

"Those who really feel the difficulties have been led to this opinion
by observation of the sensible world. (1) They think that contradictories
or contraries are true at the same time, because they see contraries
coming into existence out of the same thing. If, then, that which
is not cannot come to be, the thing must have existed before as both
contraries alike, as Anaxagoras says all is mixed in all, and Democritus
too; for he says the void and the full exist alike in every part,
and yet one of these is being, and the other non-being. To those,
then, whose belief rests on these grounds, we shall say that in a
sense they speak rightly and in a sense they err. For 'that which
is' has two meanings, so that in some sense a thing can come to be
out of that which is not, while in some sense it cannot, and the same
thing can at the same time be in being and not in being-but not in
the same respect. For the same thing can be potentially at the same
time two contraries, but it cannot actually. And again we shall ask
them to believe that among existing things there is also another kind
of substance to which neither movement nor destruction nor generation
at all belongs. 

"And (2) similarly some have inferred from observation of the sensible
world the truth of appearances. For they think that the truth should
not be determined by the large or small number of those who hold a
belief, and that the same thing is thought sweet by some when they
taste it, and bitter by others, so that if all were ill or all were
mad, and only two or three were well or sane, these would be thought
ill and mad, and not the others. 

"And again, they say that many of the other animals receive impressions
contrary to ours; and that even to the senses of each individual,
things do not always seem the same. Which, then, of these impressions
are true and which are false is not obvious; for the one set is no
more true than the other, but both are alike. And this is why Democritus,
at any rate, says that either there is no truth or to us at least
it is not evident. 

"And in general it is because these thinkers suppose knowledge to
be sensation, and this to be a physical alteration, that they say
that what appears to our senses must be true; for it is for these
reasons that both Empedocles and Democritus and, one may almost say,
all the others have fallen victims to opinions of this sort. For Empedocles
says that when men change their condition they change their knowledge;
"

"For wisdom increases in men according to what is before them.
"

"And elsewhere he says that:- "

"So far as their nature changed, so far to them always 

"Came changed thoughts into mind. "

"And Parmenides also expresses himself in the same way: "

"For as at each time the much-bent limbs are composed, 

"So is the mind of men; for in each and all men 

"'Tis one thing thinks-the substance of their limbs: 

"For that of which there is more is thought. "

"A saying of Anaxagoras to some of his friends is also related,-that
things would be for them such as they supposed them to be. And they
say that Homer also evidently had this opinion, because he made Hector,
when he was unconscious from the blow, lie 'thinking other thoughts',-which
implies that even those who are bereft of thought have thoughts, though
not the same thoughts. Evidently, then, if both are forms of knowledge,
the real things also are at the same time 'both so and not so'. And
it is in this direction that the consequences are most difficult.
For if those who have seen most of such truth as is possible for us
(and these are those who seek and love it most)-if these have such
opinions and express these views about the truth, is it not natural
that beginners in philosophy should lose heart? For to seek the truth
would be to follow flying game. 

"But the reason why these thinkers held this opinion is that while
they were inquiring into the truth of that which is, they thought,
'that which is' was identical with the sensible world; in this, however,
there is largely present the nature of the indeterminate-of that which
exists in the peculiar sense which we have explained; and therefore,
while they speak plausibly, they do not say what is true (for it is
fitting to put the matter so rather than as Epicharmus put it against
Xenophanes). And again, because they saw that all this world of nature
is in movement and that about that which changes no true statement
can be made, they said that of course, regarding that which everywhere
in every respect is changing, nothing could truly be affirmed. It
was this belief that blossomed into the most extreme of the views
above mentioned, that of the professed Heracliteans, such as was held
by Cratylus, who finally did not think it right to say anything but
only moved his finger, and criticized Heraclitus for saying that it
is impossible to step twice into the same river; for he thought one
could not do it even once. 

"But we shall say in answer to this argument also that while there
is some justification for their thinking that the changing, when it
is changing, does not exist, yet it is after all disputable; for that
which is losing a quality has something of that which is being lost,
and of that which is coming to be, something must already be. And
in general if a thing is perishing, will be present something that
exists; and if a thing is coming to be, there must be something from
which it comes to be and something by which it is generated, and this
process cannot go on ad infinitum.-But, leaving these arguments, let
us insist on this, that it is not the same thing to change in quantity
and in quality. Grant that in quantity a thing is not constant; still
it is in respect of its form that we know each thing.-And again, it
would be fair to criticize those who hold this view for asserting
about the whole material universe what they saw only in a minority
even of sensible things. For only that region of the sensible world
which immediately surrounds us is always in process of destruction
and generation; but this is-so to speak-not even a fraction of the
whole, so that it would have been juster to acquit this part of the
world because of the other part, than to condemn the other because
of this.-And again, obviously we shall make to them also the same
reply that we made long ago; we must show them and persuade them that
there is something whose nature is changeless. Indeed, those who say
that things at the same time are and are not, should in consequence
say that all things are at rest rather than that they are in movement;
for there is nothing into which they can change, since all attributes
belong already to all subjects. 

"Regarding the nature of truth, we must maintain that not everything
which appears is true; firstly, because even if sensation-at least
of the object peculiar to the sense in question-is not false, still
appearance is not the same as sensation.-Again, it is fair to express
surprise at our opponents' raising the question whether magnitudes
are as great, and colours are of such a nature, as they appear to
people at a distance, or as they appear to those close at hand, and
whether they are such as they appear to the healthy or to the sick,
and whether those things are heavy which appear so to the weak or
those which appear so to the strong, and those things true which appear
to the slee ing or to the waking. For obviously they do not think
these to be open questions; no one, at least, if when he is in Libya
he has fancied one night that he is in Athens, starts for the concert
hall.-And again with regard to the future, as Plato says, surely the
opinion of the physician and that of the ignorant man are not equally
weighty, for instance, on the question whether a man will get well
or not.-And again, among sensations themselves the sensation of a
foreign object and that of the appropriate object, or that of a kindred
object and that of the object of the sense in question, are not equally
authoritative, but in the case of colour sight, not taste, has the
authority, and in the case of flavour taste, not sight; each of which
senses never says at the same time of the same object that it simultaneously
is 'so and not so'.-But not even at different times does one sense
disagree about the quality, but only about that to which the quality
belongs. I mean, for instance, that the same wine might seem, if either
it or one's body changed, at one time sweet and at another time not
sweet; but at least the sweet, such as it is when it exists, has never
yet changed, but one is always right about it, and that which is to
be sweet is of necessity of such and such a nature. Yet all these
views destroy this necessity, leaving nothing to be of necessity,
as they leave no essence of anything; for the necessary cannot be
in this way and also in that, so that if anything is of necessity,
it will not be 'both so and not so'. 

"And, in general, if only the sensible exists, there would be nothing
if animate things were not; for there would be no faculty of sense.
Now the view that neither the sensible qualities nor the sensations
would exist is doubtless true (for they are affections of the perceiver),
but that the substrata which cause the sensation should not exist
even apart from sensation is impossible. For sensation is surely not
the sensation of itself, but there is something beyond the sensation,
which must be prior to the sensation; for that which moves is prior
in nature to that which is moved, and if they are correlative terms,
this is no less the case. 

Part 6 "

"There are, both among those who have these convictions and among
those who merely profess these views, some who raise a difficulty
by asking, who is to be the judge of the healthy man, and in general
who is likely to judge rightly on each class of questions. But such
inquiries are like puzzling over the question whether we are now asleep
or awake. And all such questions have the same meaning. These people
demand that a reason shall be given for everything; for they seek
a starting-point, and they seek to get this by demonstration, while
it is obvious from their actions that they have no conviction. But
their mistake is what we have stated it to be; they seek a reason
for things for which no reason can be given; for the starting-point
of demonstration is not demonstration. 

"These, then, might be easily persuaded of this truth, for it is not
difficult to grasp; but those who seek merely compulsion in argument
seek what is impossible; for they demand to be allowed to contradict
themselves-a claim which contradicts itself from the very first.-But
if not all things are relative, but some are self-existent, not everything
that appears will be true; for that which appears is apparent to some
one; so that he who says all things that appear are true, makes all
things relative. And, therefore, those who ask for an irresistible
argument, and at the same time demand to be called to account for
their views, must guard themselves by saying that the truth is not
that what appears exists, but that what appears exists for him to
whom it appears, and when, and to the sense to which, and under the
conditions under which it appears. And if they give an account of
their view, but do not give it in this way, they will soon find themselves
contradicting themselves. For it is possible that the same thing may
appear to be honey to the sight, but not to the taste, and that, since
we have two eyes, things may not appear the same to each, if their
sight is unlike. For to those who for the reasons named some time
ago say that what appears is true, and therefore that all things are
alike false and true, for things do not appear either the same to
all men or always the same to the same man, but often have contrary
appearances at the same time (for touch says there are two objects
when we cross our fingers, while sight says there is one)-to these
we shall say 'yes, but not to the same sense and in the same part
of it and under the same conditions and at the same time', so that
what appears will be with these qualifications true. But perhaps for
this reason those who argue thus not because they feel a difficulty
but for the sake of argument, should say that this is not true, but
true for this man. And as has been said before, they must make everything
relative-relative to opinion and perception, so that nothing either
has come to be or will be without some one's first thinking so. But
if things have come to be or will be, evidently not all things will
be relative to opinion.-Again, if a thing is one, it is in relation
to one thing or to a definite number of things; and if the same thing
is both half and equal, it is not to the double that the equal is
correlative. If, then, in relation to that which thinks, man and that
which is thought are the same, man will not be that which thinks,
but only that which is thought. And if each thing is to be relative
to that which thinks, that which thinks will be relative to an infinity
of specifically different things. 

"Let this, then, suffice to show (1) that the most indisputable of
all beliefs is that contradictory statements are not at the same time
true, and (2) what consequences follow from the assertion that they
are, and (3) why people do assert this. Now since it is impossible
that contradictories should be at the same time true of the same thing,
obviously contraries also cannot belong at the same time to the same
thing. For of contraries, one is a privation no less than it is a
contrary-and a privation of the essential nature; and privation is
the denial of a predicate to a determinate genus. If, then, it is
impossible to affirm and deny truly at the same time, it is also impossible
that contraries should belong to a subject at the same time, unless
both belong to it in particular relations, or one in a particular
relation and one without qualification. 

Part 7 "

"But on the other hand there cannot be an intermediate between contradictories,
but of one subject we must either affirm or deny any one predicate.
This is clear, in the first place, if we define what the true and
the false are. To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not
that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what
is not that it is not, is true; so that he who says of anything that
it is, or that it is not, will say either what is true or what is
false; but neither what is nor what is not is said to be or not to
be.-Again, the intermediate between the contradictories will be so
either in the way in which grey is between black and white, or as
that which is neither man nor horse is between man and horse. (a)
If it were of the latter kind, it could not change into the extremes
(for change is from not-good to good, or from good to not-good), but
as a matter of fact when there is an intermediate it is always observed
to change into the extremes. For there is no change except to opposites
and to their intermediates. (b) But if it is really intermediate,
in this way too there would have to be a change to white, which was
not from not-white; but as it is, this is never seen.-Again, every
object of understanding or reason the understanding either affirms
or denies-this is obvious from the definition-whenever it says what
is true or false. When it connects in one way by assertion or negation,
it says what is true, and when it does so in another way, what is
false.-Again, there must be an intermediate between all contradictories,
if one is not arguing merely for the sake of argument; so that it
will be possible for a man to say what is neither true nor untrue,
and there will be a middle between that which is and that which is
not, so that there will also be a kind of change intermediate between
generation and destruction.-Again, in all classes in which the negation
of an attribute involves the assertion of its contrary, even in these
there will be an intermediate; for instance, in the sphere of numbers
there will be number which is neither odd nor not-odd. But this is
impossible, as is obvious from the definition.-Again, the process
will go on ad infinitum, and the number of realities will be not only
half as great again, but even greater. For again it will be possible
to deny this intermediate with reference both to its assertion and
to its negation, and this new term will be some definite thing; for
its essence is something different.-Again, when a man, on being asked
whether a thing is white, says 'no', he has denied nothing except
that it is; and its not being is a negation. 

"Some people have acquired this opinion as other paradoxical opinions
have been acquired; when men cannot refute eristical arguments, they
give in to the argument and agree that the conclusion is true. This,
then, is why some express this view; others do so because they demand
a reason for everything. And the starting-point in dealing with all
such people is definition. Now the definition rests on the necessity
of their meaning something; for the form of words of which the word
is a sign will be its definition.-While the doctrine of Heraclitus,
that all things are and are not, seems to make everything true, that
of Anaxagoras, that there is an intermediate between the terms of
a contradiction, seems to make everything false; for when things are
mixed, the mixture is neither good nor not-good, so that one cannot
say anything that is true. 

Part 8 "

"In view of these distinctions it is obvious that the one-sided theories
which some people express about all things cannot be valid-on the
one hand the theory that nothing is true (for, say they, there is
nothing to prevent every statement from being like the statement 'the
diagonal of a square is commensurate with the side'), on the other
hand the theory that everything is true. These views are practically
the same as that of Heraclitus; for he who says that all things are
true and all are false also makes each of these statements separately,
so that since they are impossible, the double statement must be impossible
too.-Again, there are obviously contradictories which cannot be at
the same time true-nor on the other hand can all statements be false;
yet this would seem more possible in the light of what has been said.-But
against all such views we must postulate, as we said above,' not that
something is or is not, but that something has a meaning, so that
we must argue from a definition, viz. by assuming what falsity or
truth means. If that which it is true to affirm is nothing other than
that which it is false to deny, it is impossible that all statements
should be false; for one side of the contradiction must be true. Again,
if it is necessary with regard to everything either to assert or to
deny it, it is impossible that both should be false; for it is one
side of the contradiction that is false.-Therefore all such views
are also exposed to the often expressed objection, that they destroy
themselves. For he who says that everything is true makes even the
statement contrary to his own true, and therefore his own not true
(for the contrary statement denies that it is true), while he who
says everything is false makes himself also false.-And if the former
person excepts the contrary statement, saying it alone is not true,
while the latter excepts his own as being not false, none the less
they are driven to postulate the truth or falsity of an infinite number
of statements; for that which says the true statement is true is true,
and this process will go on to infinity. 

"Evidently, again, those who say all things are at rest are not right,
nor are those who say all things are in movement. For if all things
are at rest, the same statements will always be true and the same
always false,-but this obviously changes; for he who makes a statement,
himself at one time was not and again will not be. And if all things
are in motion, nothing will be true; everything therefore will be
false. But it has been shown that this is impossible. Again, it must
be that which is that changes; for change is from something to something.
But again it is not the case that all things are at rest or in motion
sometimes, and nothing for ever; for there is something which always
moves the things that are in motion, and the first mover is itself
unmoved. 



BOOK V

Part 1 

"

"'BEGINNING' means (1) that part of a thing from which one would start
first, e.g a line or a road has a beginning in either of the contrary
directions. (2) That from which each thing would best be originated,
e.g. even in learning we must sometimes begin not from the first point
and the beginning of the subject, but from the point from which we
should learn most easily. (4) That from which, as an immanent part,
a thing first comes to be, e,g, as the keel of a ship and the foundation
of a house, while in animals some suppose the heart, others the brain,
others some other part, to be of this nature. (4) That from which,
not as an immanent part, a thing first comes to be, and from which
the movement or the change naturally first begins, as a child comes
from its father and its mother, and a fight from abusive language.
(5) That at whose will that which is moved is moved and that which
changes changes, e.g. the magistracies in cities, and oligarchies
and monarchies and tyrannies, are called arhchai, and so are the arts,
and of these especially the architectonic arts. (6) That from which
a thing can first be known,-this also is called the beginning of the
thing, e.g. the hypotheses are the beginnings of demonstrations. (Causes
are spoken of in an equal number of senses; for all causes are beginnings.)
It is common, then, to all beginnings to be the first point from which
a thing either is or comes to be or is known; but of these some are
immanent in the thing and others are outside. Hence the nature of
a thing is a beginning, and so is the element of a thing, and thought
and will, and essence, and the final cause-for the good and the beautiful
are the beginning both of the knowledge and of the movement of many
things. 

Part 2 "

"'Cause' means (1) that from which, as immanent material, a thing
comes into being, e.g. the bronze is the cause of the statue and the
silver of the saucer, and so are the classes which include these.
(2) The form or pattern, i.e. the definition of the essence, and the
classes which include this (e.g. the ratio 2:1 and number in general
are causes of the octave), and the parts included in the definition.
(3) That from which the change or the resting from change first begins;
e.g. the adviser is a cause of the action, and the father a cause
of the child, and in general the maker a cause of the thing made and
the change-producing of the changing. (4) The end, i.e. that for the
sake of which a thing is; e.g. health is the cause of walking. For
'Why does one walk?' we say; 'that one may be healthy'; and in speaking
thus we think we have given the cause. The same is true of all the
means that intervene before the end, when something else has put the
process in motion, as e.g. thinning or purging or drugs or instruments
intervene before health is reached; for all these are for the sake
of the end, though they differ from one another in that some are instruments
and others are actions. 

"These, then, are practically all the senses in which causes are spoken
of, and as they are spoken of in several senses it follows both that
there are several causes of the same thing, and in no accidental sense
(e.g. both the art of sculpture and the bronze are causes of the statue
not in respect of anything else but qua statue; not, however, in the
same way, but the one as matter and the other as source of the movement),
and that things can be causes of one another (e.g. exercise of good
condition, and the latter of exercise; not, however, in the same way,
but the one as end and the other as source of movement).-Again, the
same thing is the cause of contraries; for that which when present
causes a particular thing, we sometimes charge, when absent, with
the contrary, e.g. we impute the shipwreck to the absence of the steersman,
whose presence was the cause of safety; and both-the presence and
the privation-are causes as sources of movement. 

"All the causes now mentioned fall under four senses which are the
most obvious. For the letters are the cause of syllables, and the
material is the cause of manufactured things, and fire and earth and
all such things are the causes of bodies, and the parts are causes
of the whole, and the hypotheses are causes of the conclusion, in
the sense that they are that out of which these respectively are made;
but of these some are cause as the substratum (e.g. the parts), others
as the essence (the whole, the synthesis, and the form). The semen,
the physician, the adviser, and in general the agent, are all sources
of change or of rest. The remainder are causes as the end and the
good of the other things; for that for the sake of which other things
are tends to be the best and the end of the other things; let us take
it as making no difference whether we call it good or apparent good.

"These, then, are the causes, and this is the number of their kinds,
but the varieties of causes are many in number, though when summarized
these also are comparatively few. Causes are spoken of in many senses,
and even of those which are of the same kind some are causes in a
prior and others in a posterior sense, e.g. both 'the physician' and
'the professional man' are causes of health, and both 'the ratio 2:1'
and 'number' are causes of the octave, and the classes that include
any particular cause are always causes of the particular effect. Again,
there are accidental causes and the classes which include these; e.g.
while in one sense 'the sculptor' causes the statue, in another sense
'Polyclitus' causes it, because the sculptor happens to be Polyclitus;
and the classes that include the accidental cause are also causes,
e.g. 'man'-or in general 'animal'-is the cause of the statue, because
Polyclitus is a man, and man is an animal. Of accidental causes also
some are more remote or nearer than others, as, for instance, if 'the
white' and 'the musical' were called causes of the statue, and not
only 'Polyclitus' or 'man'. But besides all these varieties of causes,
whether proper or accidental, some are called causes as being able
to act, others as acting; e.g. the cause of the house's being built
is a builder, or a builder who is building.-The same variety of language
will be found with regard to the effects of causes; e.g. a thing may
be called the cause of this statue or of a statue or in general of
an image, and of this bronze or of bronze or of matter in general;
and similarly in the case of accidental effects. Again, both accidental
and proper causes may be spoken of in combination; e.g. we may say
not 'Polyclitus' nor 'the sculptor' but 'Polyclitus the sculptor'.
Yet all these are but six in number, while each is spoken of in two
ways; for (A) they are causes either as the individual, or as the
genus, or as the accidental, or as the genus that includes the accidental,
and these either as combined, or as taken simply; and (B) all may
be taken as acting or as having a capacity. But they differ inasmuch
as the acting causes, i.e. the individuals, exist, or do not exist,
simultaneously with the things of which they are causes, e.g. this
particular man who is healing, with this particular man who is recovering
health, and this particular builder with this particular thing that
is being built; but the potential causes are not always in this case;
for the house does not perish at the same time as the builder.

Part 3 "

"'Element' means (1) the primary component immanent in a thing, and
indivisible in kind into other kinds; e.g. the elements of speech
are the parts of which speech consists and into which it is ultimately
divided, while they are no longer divided into other forms of speech
different in kind from them. If they are divided, their parts are
of the same kind, as a part of water is water (while a part of the
syllable is not a syllable). Similarly those who speak of the elements
of bodies mean the things into which bodies are ultimately divided,
while they are no longer divided into other things differing in kind;
and whether the things of this sort are one or more, they call these
elements. The so-called elements of geometrical proofs, and in general
the elements of demonstrations, have a similar character; for the
primary demonstrations, each of which is implied in many demonstrations,
are called elements of demonstrations; and the primary syllogisms,
which have three terms and proceed by means of one middle, are of
this nature. 

"(2) People also transfer the word 'element' from this meaning and
apply it to that which, being one and small, is useful for many purposes;
for which reason what is small and simple and indivisible is called
an element. Hence come the facts that the most universal things are
elements (because each of them being one and simple is present in
a plurality of things, either in all or in as many as possible), and
that unity and the point are thought by some to be first principles.
Now, since the so-called genera are universal and indivisible (for
there is no definition of them), some say the genera are elements,
and more so than the differentia, because the genus is more universal;
for where the differentia is present, the genus accompanies it, but
where the genus is present, the differentia is not always so. It is
common to all the meanings that the element of each thing is the first
component immanent in each. 

Part 4 "

"'Nature' means (1) the genesis of growing things-the meaning which
would be suggested if one were to pronounce the 'u' in phusis long.
(2) That immanent part of a growing thing, from which its growth first
proceeds. (3) The source from which the primary movement in each natural
object is present in it in virtue of its own essence. Those things
are said to grow which derive increase from something else by contact
and either by organic unity, or by organic adhesion as in the case
of embryos. Organic unity differs from contact; for in the latter
case there need not be anything besides the contact, but in organic
unities there is something identical in both parts, which makes them
grow together instead of merely touching, and be one in respect of
continuity and quantity, though not of quality.-(4) 'Nature' means
the primary material of which any natural object consists or out of
which it is made, which is relatively unshaped and cannot be changed
from its own potency, as e.g. bronze is said to be the nature of a
statue and of bronze utensils, and wood the nature of wooden things;
and so in all other cases; for when a product is made out of these
materials, the first matter is preserved throughout. For it is in
this way that people call the elements of natural objects also their
nature, some naming fire, others earth, others air, others water,
others something else of the sort, and some naming more than one of
these, and others all of them.-(5) 'Nature' means the essence of natural
objects, as with those who say the nature is the primary mode of composition,
or as Empedocles says:- "

"Nothing that is has a nature, 

"But only mixing and parting of the mixed, 

"And nature is but a name given them by men. "

Hence as regards the things that are or come to be by nature, though
that from which they naturally come to be or are is already present,
we say they have not their nature yet, unless they have their form
or shape. That which comprises both of these exists by nature, e.g.
the animals and their parts; and not only is the first matter nature
(and this in two senses, either the first, counting from the thing,
or the first in general; e.g. in the case of works in bronze, bronze
is first with reference to them, but in general perhaps water is first,
if all things that can be melted are water), but also the form or
essence, which is the end of the process of becoming.-(6) By an extension
of meaning from this sense of 'nature' every essence in general has
come to be called a 'nature', because the nature of a thing is one
kind of essence. 

"From what has been said, then, it is plain that nature in the primary
and strict sense is the essence of things which have in themselves,
as such, a source of movement; for the matter is called the nature
because it is qualified to receive this, and processes of becoming
and growing are called nature because they are movements proceeding
from this. And nature in this sense is the source of the movement
of natural objects, being present in them somehow, either potentially
or in complete reality. 

Part 5 "

"We call 'necessary' (1, a) that without which, as a condition, a
thing cannot live; e.g. breathing and food are necessary for an animal;
for it is incapable of existing without these; (b) the conditions
without which good cannot be or come to be, or without which we cannot
get rid or be freed of evil; e.g. drinking the medicine is necessary
in order that we may be cured of disease, and a man's sailing to Aegina
is necessary in order that he may get his money.-(2) The compulsory
and compulsion, i.e. that which impedes and tends to hinder, contrary
to impulse and purpose. For the compulsory is called necessary (whence
the necessary is painful, as Evenus says: 'For every necessary thing
is ever irksome'), and compulsion is a form of necessity, as Sophocles
says: 'But force necessitates me to this act'. And necessity is held
to be something that cannot be persuaded-and rightly, for it is contrary
to the movement which accords with purpose and with reasoning.-(3)
We say that that which cannot be otherwise is necessarily as it is.
And from this sense of 'necessary' all the others are somehow derived;
for a thing is said to do or suffer what is necessary in the sense
of compulsory, only when it cannot act according to its impulse because
of the compelling forces-which implies that necessity is that because
of which a thing cannot be otherwise; and similarly as regards the
conditions of life and of good; for when in the one case good, in
the other life and being, are not possible without certain conditions,
these are necessary, and this kind of cause is a sort of necessity.
Again, demonstration is a necessary thing because the conclusion cannot
be otherwise, if there has been demonstration in the unqualified sense;
and the causes of this necessity are the first premisses, i.e. the
fact that the propositions from which the syllogism proceeds cannot
be otherwise. 

"Now some things owe their necessity to something other than themselves;
others do not, but are themselves the source of necessity in other
things. Therefore the necessary in the primary and strict sense is
the simple; for this does not admit of more states than one, so that
it cannot even be in one state and also in another; for if it did
it would already be in more than one. If, then, there are any things
that are eternal and unmovable, nothing compulsory or against their
nature attaches to them. 

Part 6 "

"'One' means (1) that which is one by accident, (2) that which is
one by its own nature. (1) Instances of the accidentally one are 'Coriscus
and what is musical', and 'musical Coriscus' (for it is the same thing
to say 'Coriscus and what is musical', and 'musical Coriscus'), and
'what is musical and what is just', and 'musical Coriscus and just
Coriscus'. For all of these are called one by virtue of an accident,
'what is just and what is musical' because they are accidents of one
substance, 'what is musical and Coriscus' because the one is an accident
of the other; and similarly in a sense 'musical Coriscus' is one with
'Coriscus' because one of the parts of the phrase is an accident of
the other, i.e. 'musical' is an accident of Coriscus; and 'musical
Coriscus' is one with 'just Coriscus' because one part of each is
an accident of one and the same subject. The case is similar if the
accident is predicated of a genus or of any universal name, e.g. if
one says that man is the same as 'musical man'; for this is either
because 'musical' is an accident of man, which is one substance, or
because both are accidents of some individual, e.g. Coriscus. Both,
however, do not belong to him in the same way, but one presumably
as genus and included in his substance, the other as a state or affection
of the substance. 

"The things, then, that are called one in virtue of an accident, are
called so in this way. (2) Of things that are called one in virtue
of their own nature some (a) are so called because they are continuous,
e.g. a bundle is made one by a band, and pieces of wood are made one
by glue; and a line, even if it is bent, is called one if it is continuous,
as each part of the body is, e.g. the leg or the arm. Of these themselves,
the continuous by nature are more one than the continuous by art.
A thing is called continuous which has by its own nature one movement
and cannot have any other; and the movement is one when it is indivisible,
and it is indivisible in respect of time. Those things are continuous
by their own nature which are one not merely by contact; for if you
put pieces of wood touching one another, you will not say these are
one piece of wood or one body or one continuum of any other sort.
Things, then, that are continuous in any way called one, even if they
admit of being bent, and still more those which cannot be bent; e.g.
the shin or the thigh is more one than the leg, because the movement
of the leg need not be one. And the straight line is more one than
the bent; but that which is bent and has an angle we call both one
and not one, because its movement may be either simultaneous or not
simultaneous; but that of the straight line is always simultaneous,
and no part of it which has magnitude rests while another moves, as
in the bent line. 

"(b, i) Things are called one in another sense because their substratum
does not differ in kind; it does not differ in the case of things
whose kind is indivisible to sense. The substratum meant is either
the nearest to, or the farthest from, the final state. For, one the
one hand, wine is said to be one and water is said to be one, qua
indivisible in kind; and, on the other hand, all juices, e.g. oil
and wine, are said to be one, and so are all things that can be melted,
because the ultimate substratum of all is the same; for all of these
are water or air. 

"(ii) Those things also are called one whose genus is one though distinguished
by opposite differentiae-these too are all called one because the
genus which underlies the differentiae is one (e.g. horse, man, and
dog form a unity, because all are animals), and indeed in a way similar
to that in which the matter is one. These are sometimes called one
in this way, but sometimes it is the higher genus that is said to
be the same (if they are infimae species of their genus)-the genus
above the proximate genera; e.g. the isosceles and the equilateral
are one and the same figure because both are triangles; but they are
not the same triangles. 

"(c) Two things are called one, when the definition which states the
essence of one is indivisible from another definition which shows
us the other (though in itself every definition is divisible). Thus
even that which has increased or is diminishing is one, because its
definition is one, as, in the case of plane figures, is the definition
of their form. In general those things the thought of whose essence
is indivisible, and cannot separate them either in time or in place
or in definition, are most of all one, and of these especially those
which are substances. For in general those things that do not admit
of division are called one in so far as they do not admit of it; e.g.
if two things are indistinguishable qua man, they are one kind of
man; if qua animal, one kind of animal; if qua magnitude, one kind
of magnitude.-Now most things are called one because they either do
or have or suffer or are related to something else that is one, but
the things that are primarily called one are those whose substance
is one,-and one either in continuity or in form or in definition;
for we count as more than one either things that are not continuous,
or those whose form is not one, or those whose definition is not one.

"While in a sense we call anything one if it is a quantity and continuous,
in a sense we do not unless it is a whole, i.e. unless it has unity
of form; e.g. if we saw the parts of a shoe put together anyhow we
should not call them one all the same (unless because of their continuity);
we do this only if they are put together so as to be a shoe and to
have already a certain single form. This is why the circle is of all
lines most truly one, because it is whole and complete. 

"(3) The essence of what is one is to be some kind of beginning of
number; for the first measure is the beginning, since that by which
we first know each class is the first measure of the class; the one,
then, is the beginning of the knowable regarding each class. But the
one is not the same in all classes. For here it is a quarter-tone,
and there it is the vowel or the consonant; and there is another unit
of weight and another of movement. But everywhere the one is indivisible
either in quantity or in kind. Now that which is indivisible in quantity
is called a unit if it is not divisible in any dimension and is without
position, a point if it is not divisible in any dimension and has
position, a line if it is divisible in one dimension, a plane if in
two, a body if divisible in quantity in all--i.e. in three--dimensions.
And, reversing the order, that which is divisible in two dimensions
is a plane, that which is divisible in one a line, that which is in
no way divisible in quantity is a point or a unit,-that which has
not position a unit, that which has position a point. 

"Again, some things are one in number, others in species, others in
genus, others by analogy; in number those whose matter is one, in
species those whose definition is one, in genus those to which the
same figure of predication applies, by analogy those which are related
as a third thing is to a fourth. The latter kinds of unity are always
found when the former are; e.g. things that are one in number are
also one in species, while things that are one in species are not
all one in number; but things that are one in species are all one
in genus, while things that are so in genus are not all one in species
but are all one by analogy; while things that are one by analogy are
not all one in genus. 

"Evidently 'many' will have meanings opposite to those of 'one'; some
things are many because they are not continuous, others because their
matter-either the proximate matter or the ultimate-is divisible in
kind, others because the definitions which state their essence are
more than one. 

Part 7 "

"Things are said to 'be' (1) in an accidental sense, (2) by their
own nature. 

"(1) In an accidental sense, e.g. we say 'the righteous doer is musical',
and 'the man is musical', and 'the musician is a man', just as we
say 'the musician builds', because the builder happens to be musical
or the musician to be a builder; for here 'one thing is another' means
'one is an accident of another'. So in the cases we have mentioned;
for when we say 'the man is musical' and 'the musician is a man',
or 'he who is pale is musical' or 'the musician is pale', the last
two mean that both attributes are accidents of the same thing; the
first that the attribute is an accident of that which is, while 'the
musical is a man' means that 'musical' is an accident of a man. (In
this sense, too, the not-pale is said to be, because that of which
it is an accident is.) Thus when one thing is said in an accidental
sense to be another, this is either because both belong to the same
thing, and this is, or because that to which the attribute belongs
is, or because the subject which has as an attribute that of which
it is itself predicated, itself is. 

"(2) The kinds of essential being are precisely those that are indicated
by the figures of predication; for the senses of 'being' are just
as many as these figures. Since, then, some predicates indicate what
the subject is, others its quality, others quantity, others relation,
others activity or passivity, others its 'where', others its 'when',
'being' has a meaning answering to each of these. For there is no
difference between 'the man is recovering' and 'the man recovers',
nor between 'the man is walking or cutting' and 'the man walks' or
'cuts'; and similarly in all other cases. 

"(3) Again, 'being' and 'is' mean that a statement is true, 'not being'
that it is not true but falses-and this alike in the case of affirmation
and of negation; e.g. 'Socrates is musical' means that this is true,
or 'Socrates is not-pale' means that this is true; but 'the diagonal
of the square is not commensurate with the side' means that it is
false to say it is. 

"(4) Again, 'being' and 'that which is' mean that some of the things
we have mentioned 'are' potentially, others in complete reality. For
we say both of that which sees potentially and of that which sees
actually, that it is 'seeing', and both of that which can actualize
its knowledge and of that which is actualizing it, that it knows,
and both of that to which rest is already present and of that which
can rest, that it rests. And similarly in the case of substances;
we say the Hermes is in the stone, and the half of the line is in
the line, and we say of that which is not yet ripe that it is corn.
When a thing is potential and when it is not yet potential must be
explained elsewhere. 

Part 8 "

"We call 'substance' (1) the simple bodies, i.e. earth and fire and
water and everything of the sort, and in general bodies and the things
composed of them, both animals and divine beings, and the parts of
these. All these are called substance because they are not predicated
of a subject but everything else is predicated of them.-(2) That which,
being present in such things as are not predicated of a subject, is
the cause of their being, as the soul is of the being of an animal.-(3)
The parts which are present in such things, limiting them and marking
them as individuals, and by whose destruction the whole is destroyed,
as the body is by the destruction of the plane, as some say, and the
plane by the destruction of the line; and in general number is thought
by some to be of this nature; for if it is destroyed, they say, nothing
exists, and it limits all things.-(4) The essence, the formula of
which is a definition, is also called the substance of each thing.

"It follows, then, that 'substance' has two senses, (A) ultimate substratum,
which is no longer predicated of anything else, and (B) that which,
being a 'this', is also separable and of this nature is the shape
or form of each thing. 

Part 9 "

"'The same' means (1) that which is the same in an accidental sense,
e.g. 'the pale' and 'the musical' are the same because they are accidents
of the same thing, and 'a man' and 'musical' because the one is an
accident of the other; and 'the musical' is 'a man' because it is
an accident of the man. (The complex entity is the same as either
of the simple ones and each of these is the same as it; for both 'the
man' and 'the musical' are said to be the same as 'the musical man',
and this the same as they.) This is why all of these statements are
made not universally; for it is not true to say that every man is
the same as 'the musical' (for universal attributes belong to things
in virtue of their own nature, but accidents do not belong to them
in virtue of their own nature); but of the individuals the statements
are made without qualification. For 'Socrates' and 'musical Socrates'
are thought to be the same; but 'Socrates' is not predicable of more
than one subject, and therefore we do not say 'every Socrates' as
we say 'every man'. 

"Some things are said to be the same in this sense, others (2) are
the same by their own nature, in as many senses as that which is one
by its own nature is so; for both the things whose matter is one either
in kind or in number, and those whose essence is one, are said to
be the same. Clearly, therefore, sameness is a unity of the being
either of more than one thing or of one thing when it is treated as
more than one, ie. when we say a thing is the same as itself; for
we treat it as two. 

"Things are called 'other' if either their kinds or their matters
or the definitions of their essence are more than one; and in general
'other' has meanings opposite to those of 'the same'. 

"'Different' is applied (1) to those things which though other are
the same in some respect, only not in number but either in species
or in genus or by analogy; (2) to those whose genus is other, and
to contraries, and to an things that have their otherness in their
essence. 

"Those things are called 'like' which have the same attributes in
every respect, and those which have more attributes the same than
different, and those whose quality is one; and that which shares with
another thing the greater number or the more important of the attributes
(each of them one of two contraries) in respect of which things are
capable of altering, is like that other thing. The senses of 'unlike'
are opposite to those of 'like'. 

Part 10 "

"The term 'opposite' is applied to contradictories, and to contraries,
and to relative terms, and to privation and possession, and to the
extremes from which and into which generation and dissolution take
place; and the attributes that cannot be present at the same time
in that which is receptive of both, are said to be opposed,-either
themselves of their constituents. Grey and white colour do not belong
at the same time to the same thing; hence their constituents are opposed.

"The term 'contrary' is applied (1) to those attributes differing
in genus which cannot belong at the same time to the same subject,
(2) to the most different of the things in the same genus, (3) to
the most different of the attributes in the same recipient subject,
(4) to the most different of the things that fall under the same faculty,
(5) to the things whose difference is greatest either absolutely or
in genus or in species. The other things that are called contrary
are so called, some because they possess contraries of the above kind,
some because they are receptive of such, some because they are productive
of or susceptible to such, or are producing or suffering them, or
are losses or acquisitions, or possessions or privations, of such.
Since 'one' and 'being' have many senses, the other terms which are
derived from these, and therefore 'same', 'other', and 'contrary',
must correspond, so that they must be different for each category.

"The term 'other in species' is applied to things which being of the
same genus are not subordinate the one to the other, or which being
in the same genus have a difference, or which have a contrariety in
their substance; and contraries are other than one another in species
(either all contraries or those which are so called in the primary
sense), and so are those things whose definitions differ in the infima
species of the genus (e.g. man and horse are indivisible in genus,
but their definitions are different), and those which being in the
same substance have a difference. 'The same in species' has the various
meanings opposite to these. 

Part 11 "

"The words 'prior' and 'posterior' are applied (1) to some things
(on the assumption that there is a first, i.e. a beginning, in each
class) because they are nearer some beginning determined either absolutely
and by nature, or by reference to something or in some place or by
certain people; e.g. things are prior in place because they are nearer
either to some place determined by nature (e.g. the middle or the
last place), or to some chance object; and that which is farther is
posterior.-Other things are prior in time; some by being farther from
the present, i.e. in the case of past events (for the Trojan war is
prior to the Persian, because it is farther from the present), others
by being nearer the present, i.e. in the case of future events (for
the Nemean games are prior to the Pythian, if we treat the present
as beginning and first point, because they are nearer the present).-Other
things are prior in movement; for that which is nearer the first mover
is prior (e.g. the boy is prior to the man); and the prime mover also
is a beginning absolutely.-Others are prior in power; for that which
exceeds in power, i.e. the more powerful, is prior; and such is that
according to whose will the other-i.e. the posterior-must follow,
so that if the prior does not set it in motion the other does not
move, and if it sets it in motion it does move; and here will is a
beginning.-Others are prior in arrangement; these are the things that
are placed at intervals in reference to some one definite thing according
to some rule, e.g. in the chorus the second man is prior to the third,
and in the lyre the second lowest string is prior to the lowest; for
in the one case the leader and in the other the middle string is the
beginning. 

"These, then, are called prior in this sense, but (2) in another sense
that which is prior for knowledge is treated as also absolutely prior;
of these, the things that are prior in definition do not coincide
with those that are prior in relation to perception. For in definition
universals are prior, in relation to perception individuals. And in
definition also the accident is prior to the whole, e.g. 'musical'
to 'musical man', for the definition cannot exist as a whole without
the part; yet musicalness cannot exist unless there is some one who
is musical. 

"(3) The attributes of prior things are called prior, e.g. straightness
is prior to smoothness; for one is an attribute of a line as such,
and the other of a surface. 

"Some things then are called prior and posterior in this sense, others
(4) in respect of nature and substance, i.e. those which can be without
other things, while the others cannot be without them,-a distinction
which Plato used. (If we consider the various senses of 'being', firstly
the subject is prior, so that substance is prior; secondly, according
as potency or complete reality is taken into account, different things
are prior, for some things are prior in respect of potency, others
in respect of complete reality, e.g. in potency the half line is prior
to the whole line, and the part to the whole, and the matter to the
concrete substance, but in complete reality these are posterior; for
it is only when the whole has been dissolved that they will exist
in complete reality.) In a sense, therefore, all things that are called
prior and posterior are so called with reference to this fourth sense;
for some things can exist without others in respect of generation,
e.g. the whole without the parts, and others in respect of dissolution,
e.g. the part without the whole. And the same is true in all other
cases. 

Part 12 "

"'Potency' means (1) a source of movement or change, which is in another
thing than the thing moved or in the same thing qua other; e.g. the
art of building is a potency which is not in the thing built, while
the art of healing, which is a potency, may be in the man healed,
but not in him qua healed. 'Potency' then means the source, in general,
of change or movement in another thing or in the same thing qua other,
and also (2) the source of a thing's being moved by another thing
or by itself qua other. For in virtue of that principle, in virtue
of which a patient suffers anything, we call it 'capable' of suffering;
and this we do sometimes if it suffers anything at all, sometimes
not in respect of everything it suffers, but only if it suffers a
change for the better--(3) The capacity of performing this well or
according to intention; for sometimes we say of those who merely can
walk or speak but not well or not as they intend, that they cannot
speak or walk. So too (4) in the case of passivity--(5) The states
in virtue of which things are absolutely impassive or unchangeable,
or not easily changed for the worse, are called potencies; for things
are broken and crushed and bent and in general destroyed not by having
a potency but by not having one and by lacking something, and things
are impassive with respect to such processes if they are scarcely
and slightly affected by them, because of a 'potency' and because
they 'can' do something and are in some positive state. 

"'Potency' having this variety of meanings, so too the 'potent' or
'capable' in one sense will mean that which can begin a movement (or
a change in general, for even that which can bring things to rest
is a 'potent' thing) in another thing or in itself qua other; and
in one sense that over which something else has such a potency; and
in one sense that which has a potency of changing into something,
whether for the worse or for the better (for even that which perishes
is thought to be 'capable' of perishing, for it would not have perished
if it had not been capable of it; but, as a matter of fact, it has
a certain disposition and cause and principle which fits it to suffer
this; sometimes it is thought to be of this sort because it has something,
sometimes because it is deprived of something; but if privation is
in a sense 'having' or 'habit', everything will be capable by having
something, so that things are capable both by having a positive habit
and principle, and by having the privation of this, if it is possible
to have a privation; and if privation is not in a sense 'habit', 'capable'
is used in two distinct senses); and a thing is capable in another
sense because neither any other thing, nor itself qua other, has a
potency or principle which can destroy it. Again, all of these are
capable either merely because the thing might chance to happen or
not to happen, or because it might do so well. This sort of potency
is found even in lifeless things, e.g. in instruments; for we say
one lyre can speak, and another cannot speak at all, if it has not
a good tone. 

"Incapacity is privation of capacity-i.e. of such a principle as has
been described either in general or in the case of something that
would naturally have the capacity, or even at the time when it would
naturally already have it; for the senses in which we should call
a boy and a man and a eunuch 'incapable of begetting' are distinct.-Again,
to either kind of capacity there is an opposite incapacity-both to
that which only can produce movement and to that which can produce
it well. 

"Some things, then, are called adunata in virtue of this kind of incapacity,
while others are so in another sense; i.e. both dunaton and adunaton
are used as follows. The impossible is that of which the contrary
is of necessity true, e.g. that the diagonal of a square is commensurate
with the side is impossible, because such a statement is a falsity
of which the contrary is not only true but also necessary; that it
is commensurate, then, is not only false but also of necessity false.
The contrary of this, the possible, is found when it is not necessary
that the contrary is false, e.g. that a man should be seated is possible;
for that he is not seated is not of necessity false. The possible,
then, in one sense, as has been said, means that which is not of necessity
false; in one, that which is true; in one, that which may be true.-A
'potency' or 'power' in geometry is so called by a change of meaning.-These
senses of 'capable' or 'possible' involve no reference to potency.
But the senses which involve a reference to potency all refer to the
primary kind of potency; and this is a source of change in another
thing or in the same thing qua other. For other things are called
'capable', some because something else has such a potency over them,
some because it has not, some because it has it in a particular way.
The same is true of the things that are incapable. Therefore the proper
definition of the primary kind of potency will be 'a source of change
in another thing or in the same thing qua other'. 

Part 13 "

"'Quantum' means that which is divisible into two or more constituent
parts of which each is by nature a 'one' and a 'this'. A quantum is
a plurality if it is numerable, a magnitude if it is a measurable.
'Plurality' means that which is divisible potentially into non-continuous
parts, 'magnitude' that which is divisible into continuous parts;
of magnitude, that which is continuous in one dimension is length;
in two breadth, in three depth. Of these, limited plurality is number,
limited length is a line, breadth a surface, depth a solid.

"Again, some things are called quanta in virtue of their own nature,
others incidentally; e.g. the line is a quantum by its own nature,
the musical is one incidentally. Of the things that are quanta by
their own nature some are so as substances, e.g. the line is a quantum
(for 'a certain kind of quantum' is present in the definition which
states what it is), and others are modifications and states of this
kind of substance, e.g. much and little, long and short, broad and
narrow, deep and shallow, heavy and light, and all other such attributes.
And also great and small, and greater and smaller, both in themselves
and when taken relatively to each other, are by their own nature attributes
of what is quantitative; but these names are transferred to other
things also. Of things that are quanta incidentally, some are so called
in the sense in which it was said that the musical and the white were
quanta, viz. because that to which musicalness and whiteness belong
is a quantum, and some are quanta in the way in which movement and
time are so; for these also are called quanta of a sort and continuous
because the things of which these are attributes are divisible. I
mean not that which is moved, but the space through which it is moved;
for because that is a quantum movement also is a quantum, and because
this is a quantum time is one. 

Part 14 "

"'Quality' means (1) the differentia of the essence, e.g. man is an
animal of a certain quality because he is two-footed, and the horse
is so because it is four-footed; and a circle is a figure of particular
quality because it is without angles,-which shows that the essential
differentia is a quality.-This, then, is one meaning of quality-the
differentia of the essence, but (2) there is another sense in which
it applies to the unmovable objects of mathematics, the sense in which
the numbers have a certain quality, e.g. the composite numbers which
are not in one dimension only, but of which the plane and the solid
are copies (these are those which have two or three factors); and
in general that which exists in the essence of numbers besides quantity
is quality; for the essence of each is what it is once, e.g. that
of is not what it is twice or thrice, but what it is once; for 6 is
once 6. 

"(3) All the modifications of substances that move (e.g. heat and
cold, whiteness and blackness, heaviness and lightness, and the others
of the sort) in virtue of which, when they change, bodies are said
to alter. (4) Quality in respect of virtue and vice, and in general,
of evil and good. 

"Quality, then, seems to have practically two meanings, and one of
these is the more proper. The primary quality is the differentia of
the essence, and of this the quality in numbers is a part; for it
is a differentia of essences, but either not of things that move or
not of them qua moving. Secondly, there are the modifications of things
that move, qua moving, and the differentiae of movements. Virtue and
vice fall among these modifications; for they indicate differentiae
of the movement or activity, according to which the things in motion
act or are acted on well or badly; for that which can be moved or
act in one way is good, and that which can do so in another--the contrary--way
is vicious. Good and evil indicate quality especially in living things,
and among these especially in those which have purpose. 

Part 15 

"Things are 'relative' (1) as double to half, and treble to a third,
and in general that which contains something else many times to that
which is contained many times in something else, and that which exceeds
to that which is exceeded; (2) as that which can heat to that which
can be heated, and that which can cut to that which can be cut, and
in general the active to the passive; (3) as the measurable to the
measure, and the knowable to knowledge, and the perceptible to perception.

"(1) Relative terms of the first kind are numerically related either
indefinitely or definitely, to numbers themselves or to 1. E.g. the
double is in a definite numerical relation to 1, and that which is
'many times as great' is in a numerical, but not a definite, relation
to 1, i.e. not in this or in that numerical relation to it; the relation
of that which is half as big again as something else to that something
is a definite numerical relation to a number; that which is n+I/n
times something else is in an indefinite relation to that something,
as that which is 'many times as great' is in an indefinite relation
to 1; the relation of that which exceeds to that which is exceeded
is numerically quite indefinite; for number is always commensurate,
and 'number' is not predicated of that which is not commensurate,
but that which exceeds is, in relation to that which is exceeded,
so much and something more; and this something is indefinite; for
it can, indifferently, be either equal or not equal to that which
is exceeded.-All these relations, then, are numerically expressed
and are determinations of number, and so in another way are the equal
and the like and the same. For all refer to unity. Those things are
the same whose substance is one; those are like whose quality is one;
those are equal whose quantity is one; and 1 is the beginning and
measure of number, so that all these relations imply number, though
not in the same way. 

"(2) Things that are active or passive imply an active or a passive
potency and the actualizations of the potencies; e.g. that which is
capable of heating is related to that which is capable of being heated,
because it can heat it, and, again, that which heats is related to
that which is heated and that which cuts to that which is cut, in
the sense that they actually do these things. But numerical relations
are not actualized except in the sense which has been elsewhere stated;
actualizations in the sense of movement they have not. Of relations
which imply potency some further imply particular periods of time,
e.g. that which has made is relative to that which has been made,
and that which will make to that which will be made. For it is in
this way that a father is called the father of his son; for the one
has acted and the other has been acted on in a certain way. Further,
some relative terms imply privation of potency, i.e. 'incapable' and
terms of this sort, e.g. 'invisible'. 

"Relative terms which imply number or potency, therefore, are all
relative because their very essence includes in its nature a reference
to something else, not because something else involves a reference
to it; but (3) that which is measurable or knowable or thinkable is
called relative because something else involves a reference to it.
For 'that which is thinkable' implies that the thought of it is possible,
but the thought is not relative to 'that of which it is the thought';
for we should then have said the same thing twice. Similarly sight
is the sight of something, not 'of that of which it is the sight'
(though of course it is true to say this); in fact it is relative
to colour or to something else of the sort. But according to the other
way of speaking the same thing would be said twice,-'the sight is
of that of which it is.' 

"Things that are by their own nature called relative are called so
sometimes in these senses, sometimes if the classes that include them
are of this sort; e.g. medicine is a relative term because its genus,
science, is thought to be a relative term. Further, there are the
properties in virtue of which the things that have them are called
relative, e.g. equality is relative because the equal is, and likeness
because the like is. Other things are relative by accident; e.g. a
man is relative because he happens to be double of something and double
is a relative term; or the white is relative, if the same thing happens
to be double and white. 

Part 16 "

"What is called 'complete' is (1) that outside which it is not possible
to find any, even one, of its parts; e.g. the complete time of each
thing is that outside which it is not possible to find any time which
is a part proper to it.-(2) That which in respect of excellence and
goodness cannot be excelled in its kind; e.g. we have a complete doctor
or a complete flute-player, when they lack nothing in respect of the
form of their proper excellence. And thus, transferring the word to
bad things, we speak of a complete scandal-monger and a complete thief;
indeed we even call them good, i.e. a good thief and a good scandal-monger.
And excellence is a completion; for each thing is complete and every
substance is complete, when in respect of the form of its proper excellence
it lacks no part of its natural magnitude.-(3) The things which have
attained their end, this being good, are called complete; for things
are complete in virtue of having attained their end. Therefore, since
the end is something ultimate, we transfer the word to bad things
and say a thing has been completely spoilt, and completely destroyed,
when it in no wise falls short of destruction and badness, but is
at its last point. This is why death, too, is by a figure of speech
called the end, because both are last things. But the ultimate purpose
is also an end.-Things, then, that are called complete in virtue of
their own nature are so called in all these senses, some because in
respect of goodness they lack nothing and cannot be excelled and no
part proper to them can be found outside them, others in general because
they cannot be exceeded in their several classes and no part proper
to them is outside them; the others presuppose these first two kinds,
and are called complete because they either make or have something
of the sort or are adapted to it or in some way or other involve a
reference to the things that are called complete in the primary sense.

Part 17 "

"'Limit' means (1) the last point of each thing, i.e. the first point
beyond which it is not possible to find any part, and the first point
within which every part is; (2) the form, whatever it may be, of a
spatial magnitude or of a thing that has magnitude; (3) the end of
each thing (and of this nature is that towards which the movement
and the action are, not that from which they are-though sometimes
it is both, that from which and that to which the movement is, i.e.
the final cause); (4) the substance of each thing, and the essence
of each; for this is the limit of knowledge; and if of knowledge,
of the object also. Evidently, therefore, 'limit' has as many senses
as 'beginning', and yet more; for the beginning is a limit, but not
every limit is a beginning. 

Part 18 "

"'That in virtue of which' has several meanings:-(1) the form or substance
of each thing, e.g. that in virtue of which a man is good is the good
itself, (2) the proximate subject in which it is the nature of an
attribute to be found, e.g. colour in a surface. 'That in virtue of
which', then, in the primary sense is the form, and in a secondary
sense the matter of each thing and the proximate substratum of each.-In
general 'that in virtue of which' will found in the same number of
senses as 'cause'; for we say indifferently (3) in virtue of what
has he come?' or 'for what end has he come?'; and (4) in virtue of
what has he inferred wrongly, or inferred?' or 'what is the cause
of the inference, or of the wrong inference?'-Further (5) Kath' d
is used in reference to position, e.g. 'at which he stands' or 'along
which he walks; for all such phrases indicate place and position.

"Therefore 'in virtue of itself' must likewise have several meanings.
The following belong to a thing in virtue of itself:-(1) the essence
of each thing, e.g. Callias is in virtue of himself Callias and what
it was to be Callias;-(2) whatever is present in the 'what', e.g.
Callias is in virtue of himself an animal. For 'animal' is present
in his definition; Callias is a particular animal.-(3) Whatever attribute
a thing receives in itself directly or in one of its parts; e.g. a
surface is white in virtue of itself, and a man is alive in virtue
of himself; for the soul, in which life directly resides, is a part
of the man.-(4) That which has no cause other than itself; man has
more than one cause--animal, two-footed--but yet man is man in virtue
of himself.-(5) Whatever attributes belong to a thing alone, and in
so far as they belong to it merely by virtue of itself considered
apart by itself. 

Part 19 "

"'Disposition' means the arrangement of that which has parts, in respect
either of place or of potency or of kind; for there must be a certain
position, as even the word 'disposition' shows. 

Part 20 "

"'Having' means (1) a kind of activity of the haver and of what he
has-something like an action or movement. For when one thing makes
and one is made, between them there is a making; so too between him
who has a garment and the garment which he has there is a having.
This sort of having, then, evidently we cannot have; for the process
will go on to infinity, if it is to be possible to have the having
of what we have.-(2) 'Having' or 'habit' means a disposition according
to which that which is disposed is either well or ill disposed, and
either in itself or with reference to something else; e.g. health
is a 'habit'; for it is such a disposition.-(3) We speak of a 'habit'
if there is a portion of such a disposition; and so even the excellence
of the parts is a 'habit' of the whole thing. 

Part 21 "

"'Affection' means (1) a quality in respect of which a thing can be
altered, e.g. white and black, sweet and bitter, heaviness and lightness,
and all others of the kind.-(2) The actualization of these-the already
accomplished alterations.-(3) Especially, injurious alterations and
movements, and, above all painful injuries.-(4) Misfortunes and painful
experiences when on a large scale are called affections.

Part 22 "

"We speak of 'privation' (1) if something has not one of the attributes
which a thing might naturally have, even if this thing itself would
not naturally have it; e.g. a plant is said to be 'deprived' of eyes.-(2)
If, though either the thing itself or its genus would naturally have
an attribute, it has it not; e.g. a blind man and a mole are in different
senses 'deprived' of sight; the latter in contrast with its genus,
the former in contrast with his own normal nature.-(3) If, though
it would naturally have the attribute, and when it would naturally
have it, it has it not; for blindness is a privation, but one is not
'blind' at any and every age, but only if one has not sight at the
age at which one would naturally have it. Similarly a thing is called
blind if it has not sight in the medium in which, and in respect of
the organ in respect of which, and with reference to the object with
reference to which, and in the circumstances in which, it would naturally
have it.-(4) The violent taking away of anything is called privation.

"Indeed there are just as many kinds of privations as there are of
words with negative prefixes; for a thing is called unequal because
it has not equality though it would naturally have it, and invisible
either because it has no colour at all or because it has a poor colour,
and apodous either because it has no feet at all or because it has
imperfect feet. Again, a privative term may be used because the thing
has little of the attribute (and this means having it in a sense imperfectly),
e.g. 'kernel-less'; or because it has it not easily or not well (e.g.
we call a thing uncuttable not only if it cannot be cut but also if
it cannot be cut easily or well); or because it has not the attribute
at all; for it is not the one-eyed man but he who is sightless in
both eyes that is called blind. This is why not every man is 'good'
or 'bad', 'just' or 'unjust', but there is also an intermediate state.

Part 23 "

"To 'have' or 'hold' means many things:-(1) to treat a thing according
to one's own nature or according to one's own impulse; so that fever
is said to have a man, and tyrants to have their cities, and people
to have the clothes they wear.-(2) That in which a thing is present
as in something receptive of it is said to have the thing; e.g. the
bronze has the form of the statue, and the body has the disease.-(3)
As that which contains holds the things contained; for a thing is
said to be held by that in which it is as in a container; e.g. we
say that the vessel holds the liquid and the city holds men and the
ship sailors; and so too that the whole holds the parts.-(4) That
which hinders a thing from moving or acting according to its own impulse
is said to hold it, as pillars hold the incumbent weights, and as
the poets make Atlas hold the heavens, implying that otherwise they
would collapse on the earth, as some of the natural philosophers also
say. In this way also that which holds things together is said to
hold the things it holds together, since they would otherwise separate,
each according to its own impulse. 

"'Being in something' has similar and corresponding meanings to 'holding'
or 'having'. 

Part 24 "

"'To come from something' means (1) to come from something as from
matter, and this in two senses, either in respect of the highest genus
or in respect of the lowest species; e.g. in a sense all things that
can be melted come from water, but in a sense the statue comes from
bronze.-(2) As from the first moving principle; e.g. 'what did the
fight come from?' From abusive language, because this was the origin
of the fight.-(3) From the compound of matter and shape, as the parts
come from the whole, and the verse from the Iliad, and the stones
from the house; (in every such case the whole is a compound of matter
and shape,) for the shape is the end, and only that which attains
an end is complete.-(4) As the form from its part, e.g. man from 'two-footed'and
syllable from 'letter'; for this is a different sense from that in
which the statue comes from bronze; for the composite substance comes
from the sensible matter, but the form also comes from the matter
of the form.-Some things, then, are said to come from something else
in these senses; but (5) others are so described if one of these senses
is applicable to a part of that other thing; e.g. the child comes
from its father and mother, and plants come from the earth, because
they come from a part of those things.-(6) It means coming after a
thing in time, e.g. night comes from day and storm from fine weather,
because the one comes after the other. Of these things some are so
described because they admit of change into one another, as in the
cases now mentioned; some merely because they are successive in time,
e.g. the voyage took place 'from' the equinox, because it took place
after the equinox, and the festival of the Thargelia comes 'from'
the Dionysia, because after the Dionysia. 

Part 25 "

"'Part' means (1, a) that into which a quantum can in any way be
divided; for that which is taken from a quantum qua quantum is always
called a part of it, e.g. two is called in a sense a part of three.
It means (b), of the parts in the first sense, only those which measure
the whole; this is why two, though in one sense it is, in another
is not, called a part of three.-(2) The elements into which a kind
might be divided apart from the quantity are also called parts of
it; for which reason we say the species are parts of the genus.-(3)
The elements into which a whole is divided, or of which it consists-the
'whole' meaning either the form or that which has the form; e.g. of
the bronze sphere or of the bronze cube both the bronze-i.e. the matter
in which the form is-and the characteristic angle are parts.-(4) The
elements in the definition which explains a thing are also parts of
the whole; this is why the genus is called a part of the species,
though in another sense the species is part of the genus.

Part 26 "

"'A whole' means (1) that from which is absent none of the parts of
which it is said to be naturally a whole, and (2) that which so contains
the things it contains that they form a unity; and this in two senses-either
as being each severally one single thing, or as making up the unity
between them. For (a) that which is true of a whole class and is said
to hold good as a whole (which implies that it is a kind whole) is
true of a whole in the sense that it contains many things by being
predicated of each, and by all of them, e.g. man, horse, god, being
severally one single thing, because all are living things. But (b)
the continuous and limited is a whole, when it is a unity consisting
of several parts, especially if they are present only potentially,
but, failing this, even if they are present actually. Of these things
themselves, those which are so by nature are wholes in a higher degree
than those which are so by art, as we said in the case of unity also,
wholeness being in fact a sort of oneness. 

"Again (3) of quanta that have a beginning and a middle and an end,
those to which the position does not make a difference are called
totals, and those to which it does, wholes. Those which admit of both
descriptions are both wholes and totals. These are the things whose
nature remains the same after transposition, but whose form does not,
e.g. wax or a coat; they are called both wholes and totals; for they
have both characteristics. Water and all liquids and number are called
totals, but 'the whole number' or 'the whole water' one does not speak
of, except by an extension of meaning. To things, to which qua one
the term 'total' is applied, the term 'all' is applied when they are
treated as separate; 'this total number,' 'all these units.'

Part 27 "

"It is not any chance quantitative thing that can be said to be 'mutilated';
it must be a whole as well as divisible. For not only is two not 'mutilated'
if one of the two ones is taken away (for the part removed by mutilation
is never equal to the remainder), but in general no number is thus
mutilated; for it is also necessary that the essence remain; if a
cup is mutilated, it must still be a cup; but the number is no longer
the same. Further, even if things consist of unlike parts, not even
these things can all be said to be mutilated, for in a sense a number
has unlike parts (e.g. two and three) as well as like; but in general
of the things to which their position makes no difference, e.g. water
or fire, none can be mutilated; to be mutilated, things must be such
as in virtue of their essence have a certain position. Again, they
must be continuous; for a musical scale consists of unlike parts and
has position, but cannot become mutilated. Besides, not even the things
that are wholes are mutilated by the privation of any part. For the
parts removed must be neither those which determine the essence nor
any chance parts, irrespective of their position; e.g. a cup is not
mutilated if it is bored through, but only if the handle or a projecting
part is removed, and a man is mutilated not if the flesh or the spleen
is removed, but if an extremity is, and that not every extremity but
one which when completely removed cannot grow again. Therefore baldness
is not a mutilation. 

Part 28 "

"The term 'race' or 'genus' is used (1) if generation of things which
have the same form is continuous, e.g. 'while the race of men lasts'
means 'while the generation of them goes on continuously'.-(2) It
is used with reference to that which first brought things into existence;
for it is thus that some are called Hellenes by race and others Ionians,
because the former proceed from Hellen and the latter from Ion as
their first begetter. And the word is used in reference to the begetter
more than to the matter, though people also get a race-name from the
female, e.g. 'the descendants of Pyrrha'.-(3) There is genus in the
sense in which 'plane' is the genus of plane figures and solid' of
solids; for each of the figures is in the one case a plane of such
and such a kind, and in the other a solid of such and such a kind;
and this is what underlies the differentiae. Again (4) in definitions
the first constituent element, which is included in the 'what', is
the genus, whose differentiae the qualities are said to be 'Genus'
then is used in all these ways, (1) in reference to continuous generation
of the same kind, (2) in reference to the first mover which is of
the same kind as the things it moves, (3) as matter; for that to which
the differentia or quality belongs is the substratum, which we call
matter. 

"Those things are said to be 'other in genus' whose proximate substratum
is different, and which are not analysed the one into the other nor
both into the same thing (e.g. form and matter are different in genus);
and things which belong to different categories of being (for some
of the things that are said to 'be' signify essence, others a quality,
others the other categories we have before distinguished); these also
are not analysed either into one another or into some one thing.

Part 29 "

"'The false' means (1) that which is false as a thing, and that (a)
because it is not put together or cannot be put together, e.g. 'that
the diagonal of a square is commensurate with the side' or 'that you
are sitting'; for one of these is false always, and the other sometimes;
it is in these two senses that they are non-existent. (b) There are
things which exist, but whose nature it is to appear either not to
be such as they are or to be things that do not exist, e.g. a sketch
or a dream; for these are something, but are not the things the appearance
of which they produce in us. We call things false in this way, then,-either
because they themselves do not exist, or because the appearance which
results from them is that of something that does not exist.

"(2) A false account is the account of non-existent objects, in so
far as it is false. Hence every account is false when applied to something
other than that of which it is true; e.g. the account of a circle
is false when applied to a triangle. In a sense there is one account
of each thing, i.e. the account of its essence, but in a sense there
are many, since the thing itself and the thing itself with an attribute
are in a sense the same, e.g. Socrates and musical Socrates (a false
account is not the account of anything, except in a qualified sense).
Hence Antisthenes was too simple-minded when he claimed that nothing
could be described except by the account proper to it,-one predicate
to one subject; from which the conclusion used to be drawn that there
could be no contradiction, and almost that there could be no error.
But it is possible to describe each thing not only by the account
of itself, but also by that of something else. This may be done altogether
falsely indeed, but there is also a way in which it may be done truly;
e.g. eight may be described as a double number by the use of the definition
of two. "

"These things, then, are called false in these senses, but (3) a false
man is one who is ready at and fond of such accounts, not for any
other reason but for their own sake, and one who is good at impressing
such accounts on other people, just as we say things are which produce
a false appearance. This is why the proof in the Hippias that the
same man is false and true is misleading. For it assumes that he is
false who can deceive (i.e. the man who knows and is wise); and further
that he who is willingly bad is better. This is a false result of
induction-for a man who limps willingly is better than one who does
so unwillingly-by 'limping' Plato means 'mimicking a limp', for if
the man were lame willingly, he would presumably be worse in this
case as in the corresponding case of moral character. 

Part 30 "

"'Accident' means (1) that which attaches to something and can be
truly asserted, but neither of necessity nor usually, e.g. if some
one in digging a hole for a plant has found treasure. This-the finding
of treasure-is for the man who dug the hole an accident; for neither
does the one come of necessity from the other or after the other,
nor, if a man plants, does he usually find treasure. And a musical
man might be pale; but since this does not happen of necessity nor
usually, we call it an accident. Therefore since there are attributes
and they attach to subjects, and some of them attach to these only
in a particular place and at a particular time, whatever attaches
to a subject, but not because it was this subject, or the time this
time, or the place this place, will be an accident. Therefore, too,
there is no definite cause for an accident, but a chance cause, i.e.
an indefinite one. Going to Aegina was an accident for a man, if he
went not in order to get there, but because he was carried out of
his way by a storm or captured by pirates. The accident has happened
or exists,-not in virtue of the subject's nature, however, but of
something else; for the storm was the cause of his coming to a place
for which he was not sailing, and this was Aegina. 

"'Accident' has also (2) another meaning, i.e. all that attaches to
each thing in virtue of itself but is not in its essence, as having
its angles equal to two right angles attaches to the triangle. And
accidents of this sort may be eternal, but no accident of the other
sort is. This is explained elsewhere. 



BOOK VI

Part 1 

"

"WE are seeking the principles and the causes of the things that are,
and obviously of them qua being. For, while there is a cause of health
and of good condition, and the objects of mathematics have first principles
and elements and causes, and in general every science which is ratiocinative
or at all involves reasoning deals with causes and principles, more
or less precise, all these sciences mark off some particular being-some
genus, and inquire into this, but not into being simply nor qua being,
nor do they offer any discussion of the essence of the things of which
they treat; but starting from the essence-some making it plain to
the senses, others assuming it as a hypothesis-they then demonstrate,
more or less cogently, the essential attributes of the genus with
which they deal. It is obvious, therefore, that such an induction
yields no demonstration of substance or of the essence, but some other
way of exhibiting it. And similarly the sciences omit the question
whether the genus with which they deal exists or does not exist, because
it belongs to the same kind of thinking to show what it is and that
it is. 

"And since natural science, like other sciences, is in fact about
one class of being, i.e. to that sort of substance which has the principle
of its movement and rest present in itself, evidently it is neither
practical nor productive. For in the case of things made the principle
is in the maker-it is either reason or art or some faculty, while
in the case of things done it is in the doer-viz. will, for that which
is done and that which is willed are the same. Therefore, if all thought
is either practical or productive or theoretical, physics must be
a theoretical science, but it will theorize about such being as admits
of being moved, and about substance-as-defined for the most part only
as not separable from matter. Now, we must not fail to notice the
mode of being of the essence and of its definition, for, without this,
inquiry is but idle. Of things defined, i.e. of 'whats', some are
like 'snub', and some like 'concave'. And these differ because 'snub'
is bound up with matter (for what is snub is a concave nose), while
concavity is independent of perceptible matter. If then all natural
things are a analogous to the snub in their nature; e.g. nose, eye,
face, flesh, bone, and, in general, animal; leaf, root, bark, and,
in general, plant (for none of these can be defined without reference
to movement-they always have matter), it is clear how we must seek
and define the 'what' in the case of natural objects, and also that
it belongs to the student of nature to study even soul in a certain
sense, i.e. so much of it as is not independent of matter.

"That physics, then, is a theoretical science, is plain from these
considerations. Mathematics also, however, is theoretical; but whether
its objects are immovable and separable from matter, is not at present
clear; still, it is clear that some mathematical theorems consider
them qua immovable and qua separable from matter. But if there is
something which is eternal and immovable and separable, clearly the
knowledge of it belongs to a theoretical science,-not, however, to
physics (for physics deals with certain movable things) nor to mathematics,
but to a science prior to both. For physics deals with things which
exist separately but are not immovable, and some parts of mathematics
deal with things which are immovable but presumably do not exist separately,
but as embodied in matter; while the first science deals with things
which both exist separately and are immovable. Now all causes must
be eternal, but especially these; for they are the causes that operate
on so much of the divine as appears to us. There must, then, be three
theoretical philosophies, mathematics, physics, and what we may call
theology, since it is obvious that if the divine is present anywhere,
it is present in things of this sort. And the highest science must
deal with the highest genus. Thus, while the theoretical sciences
are more to be desired than the other sciences, this is more to be
desired than the other theoretical sciences. For one might raise the
question whether first philosophy is universal, or deals with one
genus, i.e. some one kind of being; for not even the mathematical
sciences are all alike in this respect,-geometry and astronomy deal
with a certain particular kind of thing, while universal mathematics
applies alike to all. We answer that if there is no substance other
than those which are formed by nature, natural science will be the
first science; but if there is an immovable substance, the science
of this must be prior and must be first philosophy, and universal
in this way, because it is first. And it will belong to this to consider
being qua being-both what it is and the attributes which belong to
it qua being. 

Part 2 "

"But since the unqualified term 'being' has several meanings, of which
one was seen' to be the accidental, and another the true ('non-being'
being the false), while besides these there are the figures of predication
(e.g. the 'what', quality, quantity, place, time, and any similar
meanings which 'being' may have), and again besides all these there
is that which 'is' potentially or actually:-since 'being' has many
meanings, we must say regarding the accidental, that there can be
no scientific treatment of it. This is confirmed by the fact that
no science practical, productive, or theoretical troubles itself about
it. For on the one hand he who produces a house does not produce all
the attributes that come into being along with the house; for these
are innumerable; the house that has been made may quite well be pleasant
for some people, hurtful for some, and useful to others, and different-to
put it shortly from all things that are; and the science of building
does not aim at producing any of these attributes. And in the same
way the geometer does not consider the attributes which attach thus
to figures, nor whether 'triangle' is different from 'triangle whose
angles are equal to two right angles'.-And this happens naturally
enough; for the accidental is practically a mere name. And so Plato
was in a sense not wrong in ranking sophistic as dealing with that
which is not. For the arguments of the sophists deal, we may say,
above all with the accidental; e.g. the question whether 'musical'
and 'lettered' are different or the same, and whether 'musical Coriscus'
and 'Coriscus' are the same, and whether 'everything which is, but
is not eternal, has come to be', with the paradoxical conclusion that
if one who was musical has come to be lettered, he must also have
been lettered and have come to be musical, and all the other arguments
of this sort; the accidental is obviously akin to non-being. And this
is clear also from arguments such as the following: things which are
in another sense come into being and pass out of being by a process,
but things which are accidentally do not. But still we must, as far
as we can, say further, regarding the accidental, what its nature
is and from what cause it proceeds; for it will perhaps at the same
time become clear why there is no science of it. 

"Since, among things which are, some are always in the same state
and are of necessity (not necessity in the sense of compulsion but
that which we assert of things because they cannot be otherwise),
and some are not of necessity nor always, but for the most part, this
is the principle and this the cause of the existence of the accidental;
for that which is neither always nor for the most part, we call accidental.
For instance, if in the dog-days there is wintry and cold weather,
we say this is an accident, but not if there is sultry heat, because
the latter is always or for the most part so, but not the former.
And it is an accident that a man is pale (for this is neither always
nor for the most part so), but it is not by accident that he is an
animal. And that the builder produces health is an accident, because
it is the nature not of the builder but of the doctor to do this,-but
the builder happened to be a doctor. Again, a confectioner, aiming
at giving pleasure, may make something wholesome, but not in virtue
of the confectioner's art; and therefore we say 'it was an accident',
and while there is a sense in which he makes it, in the unqualified
sense he does not. For to other things answer faculties productive
of them, but to accidental results there corresponds no determinate
art nor faculty; for of things which are or come to be by accident,
the cause also is accidental. Therefore, since not all things either
are or come to be of necessity and always, but, the majority of things
are for the most part, the accidental must exist; for instance a pale
man is not always nor for the most part musical, but since this sometimes
happens, it must be accidental (if not, everything will be of necessity).
The matter, therefore, which is capable of being otherwise than as
it usually is, must be the cause of the accidental. And we must take
as our starting-point the question whether there is nothing that is
neither always nor for the most part. Surely this is impossible. There
is, then, besides these something which is fortuitous and accidental.
But while the usual exists, can nothing be said to be always, or are
there eternal things? This must be considered later,' but that there
is no science of the accidental is obvious; for all science is either
of that which is always or of that which is for the most part. (For
how else is one to learn or to teach another? The thing must be determined
as occurring either always or for the most part, e.g. that honey-water
is useful for a patient in a fever is true for the most part.) But
that which is contrary to the usual law science will be unable to
state, i.e. when the thing does not happen, e.g.'on the day of new
moon'; for even that which happens on the day of new moon happens
then either always or for the most part; but the accidental is contrary
to such laws. We have stated, then, what the accidental is, and from
what cause it arises, and that there is no science which deals with
it. 

Part 3 "

"That there are principles and causes which are generable and destructible
without ever being in course of being generated or destroyed, is obvious.
For otherwise all things will be of necessity, since that which is
being generated or destroyed must have a cause which is not accidentally
its cause. Will A exist or not? It will if B happens; and if not,
not. And B will exist if C happens. And thus if time is constantly
subtracted from a limited extent of time, one will obviously come
to the present. This man, then, will die by violence, if he goes out;
and he will do this if he gets thirsty; and he will get thirsty if
something else happens; and thus we shall come to that which is now
present, or to some past event. For instance, he will go out if he
gets thirsty; and he will get thirsty if he is eating pungent food;
and this is either the case or not; so that he will of necessity die,
or of necessity not die. And similarly if one jumps over to past events,
the same account will hold good; for this-I mean the past condition-is
already present in something. Everything, therefore, that will be,
will be of necessity; e.g. it is necessary that he who lives shall
one day die; for already some condition has come into existence, e.g.
the presence of contraries in the same body. But whether he is to
die by disease or by violence is not yet determined, but depends on
the happening of something else. Clearly then the process goes back
to a certain starting-point, but this no longer points to something
further. This then will be the starting-point for the fortuitous,
and will have nothing else as cause of its coming to be. But to what
sort of starting-point and what sort of cause we thus refer the fortuitous-whether
to matter or to the purpose or to the motive power, must be carefully
considered. 

Part 4 "

"Let us dismiss accidental being; for we have sufficiently determined
its nature. But since that which is in the sense of being true, or
is not in the sense of being false, depends on combination and separation,
and truth and falsity together depend on the allocation of a pair
of contradictory judgements (for the true judgement affirms where
the subject and predicate really are combined, and denies where they
are separated, while the false judgement has the opposite of this
allocation; it is another question, how it happens that we think things
together or apart; by 'together' and 'apart' I mean thinking them
so that there is no succession in the thoughts but they become a unity);
for falsity and truth are not in things-it is not as if the good were
true, and the bad were in itself false-but in thought; while with
regard to simple concepts and 'whats' falsity and truth do not exist
even in thought--this being so, we must consider later what has to
be discussed with regard to that which is or is not in this sense.
But since the combination and the separation are in thought and not
in the things, and that which is in this sense is a different sort
of 'being' from the things that are in the full sense (for the thought
attaches or removes either the subject's 'what' or its having a certain
quality or quantity or something else), that which is accidentally
and that which is in the sense of being true must be dismissed. For
the cause of the former is indeterminate, and that of the latter is
some affection of the thought, and both are related to the remaining
genus of being, and do not indicate the existence of any separate
class of being. Therefore let these be dismissed, and let us consider
the causes and the principles of being itself, qua being. (It was
clear in our discussion of the various meanings of terms, that 'being'
has several meanings.) 



BOOK VII

Part 1 

"

"THERE are several senses in which a thing may be said to 'be', as
we pointed out previously in our book on the various senses of words;'
for in one sense the 'being' meant is 'what a thing is' or a 'this',
and in another sense it means a quality or quantity or one of the
other things that are predicated as these are. While 'being' has all
these senses, obviously that which 'is' primarily is the 'what', which
indicates the substance of the thing. For when we say of what quality
a thing is, we say that it is good or bad, not that it is three cubits
long or that it is a man; but when we say what it is, we do not say
'white' or 'hot' or 'three cubits long', but 'a man' or 'a 'god'.
And all other things are said to be because they are, some of them,
quantities of that which is in this primary sense, others qualities
of it, others affections of it, and others some other determination
of it. And so one might even raise the question whether the words
'to walk', 'to be healthy', 'to sit' imply that each of these things
is existent, and similarly in any other case of this sort; for none
of them is either self-subsistent or capable of being separated from
substance, but rather, if anything, it is that which walks or sits
or is healthy that is an existent thing. Now these are seen to be
more real because there is something definite which underlies them
(i.e. the substance or individual), which is implied in such a predicate;
for we never use the word 'good' or 'sitting' without implying this.
Clearly then it is in virtue of this category that each of the others
also is. Therefore that which is primarily, i.e. not in a qualified
sense but without qualification, must be substance. 

"Now there are several senses in which a thing is said to be first;
yet substance is first in every sense-(1) in definition, (2) in order
of knowledge, (3) in time. For (3) of the other categories none can
exist independently, but only substance. And (1) in definition also
this is first; for in the definition of each term the definition of
its substance must be present. And (2) we think we know each thing
most fully, when we know what it is, e.g. what man is or what fire
is, rather than when we know its quality, its quantity, or its place;
since we know each of these predicates also, only when we know what
the quantity or the quality is. 

"And indeed the question which was raised of old and is raised now
and always, and is always the subject of doubt, viz. what being is,
is just the question, what is substance? For it is this that some
assert to be one, others more than one, and that some assert to be
limited in number, others unlimited. And so we also must consider
chiefly and primarily and almost exclusively what that is which is
in this sense. 

Part 2 "

"Substance is thought to belong most obviously to bodies; and so we
say that not only animals and plants and their parts are substances,
but also natural bodies such as fire and water and earth and everything
of the sort, and all things that are either parts of these or composed
of these (either of parts or of the whole bodies), e.g. the physical
universe and its parts, stars and moon and sun. But whether these
alone are substances, or there are also others, or only some of these,
or others as well, or none of these but only some other things, are
substances, must be considered. Some think the limits of body, i.e.
surface, line, point, and unit, are substances, and more so than body
or the solid. 

"Further, some do not think there is anything substantial besides
sensible things, but others think there are eternal substances which
are more in number and more real; e.g. Plato posited two kinds of
substance-the Forms and objects of mathematics-as well as a third
kind, viz. the substance of sensible bodies. And Speusippus made still
more kinds of substance, beginning with the One, and assuming principles
for each kind of substance, one for numbers, another for spatial magnitudes,
and then another for the soul; and by going on in this way he multiplies
the kinds of substance. And some say Forms and numbers have the same
nature, and the other things come after them-lines and planes-until
we come to the substance of the material universe and to sensible
bodies. 

"Regarding these matters, then, we must inquire which of the common
statements are right and which are not right, and what substances
there are, and whether there are or are not any besides sensible substances,
and how sensible substances exist, and whether there is a substance
capable of separate existence (and if so why and how) or no such substance,
apart from sensible substances; and we must first sketch the nature
of substance. 

Part 3 "

"The word 'substance' is applied, if not in more senses, still at
least to four main objects; for both the essence and the universal
and the genus, are thought to be the substance of each thing, and
fourthly the substratum. Now the substratum is that of which everything
else is predicated, while it is itself not predicated of anything
else. And so we must first determine the nature of this; for that
which underlies a thing primarily is thought to be in the truest sense
its substance. And in one sense matter is said to be of the nature
of substratum, in another, shape, and in a third, the compound of
these. (By the matter I mean, for instance, the bronze, by the shape
the pattern of its form, and by the compound of these the statue,
the concrete whole.) Therefore if the form is prior to the matter
and more real, it will be prior also to the compound of both, for
the same reason. 

"We have now outlined the nature of substance, showing that it is
that which is not predicated of a stratum, but of which all else is
predicated. But we must not merely state the matter thus; for this
is not enough. The statement itself is obscure, and further, on this
view, matter becomes substance. For if this is not substance, it baffles
us to say what else is. When all else is stripped off evidently nothing
but matter remains. For while the rest are affections, products, and
potencies of bodies, length, breadth, and depth are quantities and
not substances (for a quantity is not a substance), but the substance
is rather that to which these belong primarily. But when length and
breadth and depth are taken away we see nothing left unless there
is something that is bounded by these; so that to those who consider
the question thus matter alone must seem to be substance. By matter
I mean that which in itself is neither a particular thing nor of a
certain quantity nor assigned to any other of the categories by which
being is determined. For there is something of which each of these
is predicated, whose being is different from that of each of the predicates
(for the predicates other than substance are predicated of substance,
while substance is predicated of matter). Therefore the ultimate substratum
is of itself neither a particular thing nor of a particular quantity
nor otherwise positively characterized; nor yet is it the negations
of these, for negations also will belong to it only by accident.

"If we adopt this point of view, then, it follows that matter is substance.
But this is impossible; for both separability and 'thisness' are thought
to belong chiefly to substance. And so form and the compound of form
and matter would be thought to be substance, rather than matter. The
substance compounded of both, i.e. of matter and shape, may be dismissed;
for it is posterior and its nature is obvious. And matter also is
in a sense manifest. But we must inquire into the third kind of substance;
for this is the most perplexing. 

"Some of the sensible substances are generally admitted to be substances,
so that we must look first among these. For it is an advantage to
advance to that which is more knowable. For learning proceeds for
all in this way-through that which is less knowable by nature to that
which is more knowable; and just as in conduct our task is to start
from what is good for each and make what is without qualification
good good for each, so it is our task to start from what is more knowable
to oneself and make what is knowable by nature knowable to oneself.
Now what is knowable and primary for particular sets of people is
often knowable to a very small extent, and has little or nothing of
reality. But yet one must start from that which is barely knowable
but knowable to oneself, and try to know what is knowable without
qualification, passing, as has been said, by way of those very things
which one does know. 

Part 4 "

"Since at the start we distinguished the various marks by which we
determine substance, and one of these was thought to be the essence,
we must investigate this. And first let us make some linguistic remarks
about it. The essence of each thing is what it is said to be propter
se. For being you is not being musical, since you are not by your
very nature musical. What, then, you are by your very nature is your
essence. 

"Nor yet is the whole of this the essence of a thing; not that which
is propter se as white is to a surface, because being a surface is
not identical with being white. But again the combination of both-'being
a white surface'-is not the essence of surface, because 'surface'
itself is added. The formula, therefore, in which the term itself
is not present but its meaning is expressed, this is the formula of
the essence of each thing. Therefore if to be a white surface is to
be a smooth surface, to be white and to be smooth are one and the
same. 

"But since there are also compounds answering to the other categories
(for there is a substratum for each category, e.g. for quality, quantity,
time, place, and motion), we must inquire whether there is a formula
of the essence of each of them, i.e. whether to these compounds also
there belongs an essence, e.g. 'white man'. Let the compound be denoted
by 'cloak'. What is the essence of cloak? But, it may be said, this
also is not a propter se expression. We reply that there are just
two ways in which a predicate may fail to be true of a subject propter
se, and one of these results from the addition, and the other from
the omission, of a determinant. One kind of predicate is not propter
se because the term that is being defined is combined with another
determinant, e.g. if in defining the essence of white one were to
state the formula of white man; the other because in the subject another
determinant is combined with that which is expressed in the formula,
e.g. if 'cloak' meant 'white man', and one were to define cloak as
white; white man is white indeed, but its essence is not to be white.

"But is being-a-cloak an essence at all? Probably not. For the essence
is precisely what something is; but when an attribute is asserted
of a subject other than itself, the complex is not precisely what
some 'this' is, e.g. white man is not precisely what some 'this' is,
since thisness belongs only to substances. Therefore there is an essence
only of those things whose formula is a definition. But we have a
definition not where we have a word and a formula identical in meaning
(for in that case all formulae or sets of words would be definitions;
for there will be some name for any set of words whatever, so that
even the Iliad will be a definition), but where there is a formula
of something primary; and primary things are those which do not imply
the predication of one element in them of another element. Nothing,
then, which is not a species of a genus will have an essence-only
species will have it, for these are thought to imply not merely that
the subject participates in the attribute and has it as an affection,
or has it by accident; but for ever thing else as well, if it has
a name, there be a formula of its meaning-viz. that this attribute
belongs to this subject; or instead of a simple formula we shall be
able to give a more accurate one; but there will be no definition
nor essence. 

"Or has 'definition', like 'what a thing is', several meanings? 'What
a thing is' in one sense means substance and the 'this', in another
one or other of the predicates, quantity, quality, and the like. For
as 'is' belongs to all things, not however in the same sense, but
to one sort of thing primarily and to others in a secondary way, so
too 'what a thing is' belongs in the simple sense to substance, but
in a limited sense to the other categories. For even of a quality
we might ask what it is, so that quality also is a 'what a thing is',-not
in the simple sense, however, but just as, in the case of that which
is not, some say, emphasizing the linguistic form, that that is which
is not is-not is simply, but is non-existent; so too with quality.

"We must no doubt inquire how we should express ourselves on each
point, but certainly not more than how the facts actually stand. And
so now also, since it is evident what language we use, essence will
belong, just as 'what a thing is' does, primarily and in the simple
sense to substance, and in a secondary way to the other categories
also,-not essence in the simple sense, but the essence of a quality
or of a quantity. For it must be either by an equivocation that we
say these are, or by adding to and taking from the meaning of 'are'
(in the way in which that which is not known may be said to be known),-the
truth being that we use the word neither ambiguously nor in the same
sense, but just as we apply the word 'medical' by virtue of a reference
to one and the same thing, not meaning one and the same thing, nor
yet speaking ambiguously; for a patient and an operation and an instrument
are called medical neither by an ambiguity nor with a single meaning,
but with reference to a common end. But it does not matter at all
in which of the two ways one likes to describe the facts; this is
evident, that definition and essence in the primary and simple sense
belong to substances. Still they belong to other things as well, only
not in the primary sense. For if we suppose this it does not follow
that there is a definition of every word which means the same as any
formula; it must mean the same as a particular kind of formula; and
this condition is satisfied if it is a formula of something which
is one, not by continuity like the Iliad or the things that are one
by being bound together, but in one of the main senses of 'one', which
answer to the senses of 'is'; now 'that which is' in one sense denotes
a 'this', in another a quantity, in another a quality. And so there
can be a formula or definition even of white man, but not in the sense
in which there is a definition either of white or of a substance.

Part 5 "

"It is a difficult question, if one denies that a formula with an
added determinant is a definition, whether any of the terms that are
not simple but coupled will be definable. For we must explain them
by adding a determinant. E.g. there is the nose, and concavity, and
snubness, which is compounded out of the two by the presence of the
one in the other, and it is not by accident that the nose has the
attribute either of concavity or of snubness, but in virtue of its
nature; nor do they attach to it as whiteness does to Callias, or
to man (because Callias, who happens to be a man, is white), but as
'male' attaches to animal and 'equal' to quantity, and as all so-called
'attributes propter se' attach to their subjects. And such attributes
are those in which is involved either the formula or the name of the
subject of the particular attribute, and which cannot be explained
without this; e.g. white can be explained apart from man, but not
female apart from animal. Therefore there is either no essence and
definition of any of these things, or if there is, it is in another
sense, as we have said. 

"But there is also a second difficulty about them. For if snub nose
and concave nose are the same thing, snub and concave will be the
thing; but if snub and concave are not the same (because it is impossible
to speak of snubness apart from the thing of which it is an attribute
propter se, for snubness is concavity-in-a-nose), either it is impossible
to say 'snub nose' or the same thing will have been said twice, concave-nose
nose; for snub nose will be concave-nose nose. And so it is absurd
that such things should have an essence; if they have, there will
be an infinite regress; for in snub-nose nose yet another 'nose' will
be involved. 

"Clearly, then, only substance is definable. For if the other categories
also are definable, it must be by addition of a determinant, e.g.
the qualitative is defined thus, and so is the odd, for it cannot
be defined apart from number; nor can female be defined apart from
animal. (When I say 'by addition' I mean the expressions in which
it turns out that we are saying the same thing twice, as in these
instances.) And if this is true, coupled terms also, like 'odd number',
will not be definable (but this escapes our notice because our formulae
are not accurate.). But if these also are definable, either it is
in some other way or, as we definition and essence must be said to
have more than one sense. Therefore in one sense nothing will have
a definition and nothing will have an essence, except substances,
but in another sense other things will have them. Clearly, then, definition
is the formula of the essence, and essence belongs to substances either
alone or chiefly and primarily and in the unqualified sense.

Part 6 "

"We must inquire whether each thing and its essence are the same or
different. This is of some use for the inquiry concerning substance;
for each thing is thought to be not different from its substance,
and the essence is said to be the substance of each thing.

"Now in the case of accidental unities the two would be generally
thought to be different, e.g. white man would be thought to be different
from the essence of white man. For if they are the same, the essence
of man and that of white man are also the same; for a man and a white
man are the same thing, as people say, so that the essence of white
man and that of man would be also the same. But perhaps it does not
follow that the essence of accidental unities should be the same as
that of the simple terms. For the extreme terms are not in the same
way identical with the middle term. But perhaps this might be thought
to follow, that the extreme terms, the accidents, should turn out
to be the same, e.g. the essence of white and that of musical; but
this is not actually thought to be the case. 

"But in the case of so-called self-subsistent things, is a thing necessarily
the same as its essence? E.g. if there are some substances which have
no other substances nor entities prior to them-substances such as
some assert the Ideas to be?-If the essence of good is to be different
from good-itself, and the essence of animal from animal-itself, and
the essence of being from being-itself, there will, firstly, be other
substances and entities and Ideas besides those which are asserted,
and, secondly, these others will be prior substances, if essence is
substance. And if the posterior substances and the prior are severed
from each other, (a) there will be no knowledge of the former, and
(b) the latter will have no being. (By 'severed' I mean, if the good-itself
has not the essence of good, and the latter has not the property of
being good.) For (a) there is knowledge of each thing only when we
know its essence. And (b) the case is the same for other things as
for the good; so that if the essence of good is not good, neither
is the essence of reality real, nor the essence of unity one. And
all essences alike exist or none of them does; so that if the essence
of reality is not real, neither is any of the others. Again, that
to which the essence of good does not belong is not good.-The good,
then, must be one with the essence of good, and the beautiful with
the essence of beauty, and so with all things which do not depend
on something else but are self-subsistent and primary. For it is enough
if they are this, even if they are not Forms; or rather, perhaps,
even if they are Forms. (At the same time it is clear that if there
are Ideas such as some people say there are, it will not be substratum
that is substance; for these must be substances, but not predicable
of a substratum; for if they were they would exist only by being participated
in.) 

"Each thing itself, then, and its essence are one and the same in
no merely accidental way, as is evident both from the preceding arguments
and because to know each thing, at least, is just to know its essence,
so that even by the exhibition of instances it becomes clear that
both must be one. 

"(But of an accidental term, e.g.'the musical' or 'the white', since
it has two meanings, it is not true to say that it itself is identical
with its essence; for both that to which the accidental quality belongs,
and the accidental quality, are white, so that in a sense the accident
and its essence are the same, and in a sense they are not; for the
essence of white is not the same as the man or the white man, but
it is the same as the attribute white.) 

"The absurdity of the separation would appear also if one were to
assign a name to each of the essences; for there would be yet another
essence besides the original one, e.g. to the essence of horse there
will belong a second essence. Yet why should not some things be their
essences from the start, since essence is substance? But indeed not
only are a thing and its essence one, but the formula of them is also
the same, as is clear even from what has been said; for it is not
by accident that the essence of one, and the one, are one. Further,
if they are to be different, the process will go on to infinity; for
we shall have (1) the essence of one, and (2) the one, so that to
terms of the former kind the same argument will be applicable.

"Clearly, then, each primary and self-subsistent thing is one and
the same as its essence. The sophistical objections to this position,
and the question whether Socrates and to be Socrates are the same
thing, are obviously answered by the same solution; for there is no
difference either in the standpoint from which the question would
be asked, or in that from which one could answer it successfully.
We have explained, then, in what sense each thing is the same as its
essence and in what sense it is not. 

Part 7 "

"Of things that come to be, some come to be by nature, some by art,
some spontaneously. Now everything that comes to be comes to be by
the agency of something and from something and comes to be something.
And the something which I say it comes to be may be found in any category;
it may come to be either a 'this' or of some size or of some quality
or somewhere. 

"Now natural comings to be are the comings to be of those things which
come to be by nature; and that out of which they come to be is what
we call matter; and that by which they come to be is something which
exists naturally; and the something which they come to be is a man
or a plant or one of the things of this kind, which we say are substances
if anything is-all things produced either by nature or by art have
matter; for each of them is capable both of being and of not being,
and this capacity is the matter in each-and, in general, both that
from which they are produced is nature, and the type according to
which they are produced is nature (for that which is produced, e.g.
a plant or an animal, has a nature), and so is that by which they
are produced--the so-called 'formal' nature, which is specifically
the same (though this is in another individual); for man begets man.

"Thus, then, are natural products produced; all other productions
are called 'makings'. And all makings proceed either from art or from
a faculty or from thought. Some of them happen also spontaneously
or by luck just as natural products sometimes do; for there also the
same things sometimes are produced without seed as well as from seed.
Concerning these cases, then, we must inquire later, but from art
proceed the things of which the form is in the soul of the artist.
(By form I mean the essence of each thing and its primary substance.)
For even contraries have in a sense the same form; for the substance
of a privation is the opposite substance, e.g. health is the substance
of disease (for disease is the absence of health); and health is the
formula in the soul or the knowledge of it. The healthy subject is
produced as the result of the following train of thought:-since this
is health, if the subject is to be healthy this must first be present,
e.g. a uniform state of body, and if this is to be present, there
must be heat; and the physician goes on thinking thus until he reduces
the matter to a final something which he himself can produce. Then
the process from this point onward, i.e. the process towards health,
is called a 'making'. Therefore it follows that in a sense health
comes from health and house from house, that with matter from that
without matter; for the medical art and the building art are the form
of health and of the house, and when I speak of substance without
matter I mean the essence. 

"Of the productions or processes one part is called thinking and the
other making,-that which proceeds from the starting-point and the
form is thinking, and that which proceeds from the final step of the
thinking is making. And each of the other, intermediate, things is
produced in the same way. I mean, for instance, if the subject is
to be healthy his bodily state must be made uniform. What then does
being made uniform imply? This or that. And this depends on his being
made warm. What does this imply? Something else. And this something
is present potentially; and what is present potentially is already
in the physician's power. 

"The active principle then and the starting point for the process
of becoming healthy is, if it happens by art, the form in the soul,
and if spontaneously, it is that, whatever it is, which starts the
making, for the man who makes by art, as in healing the starting-point
is perhaps the production of warmth (and this the physician produces
by rubbing). Warmth in the body, then, is either a part of health
or is followed (either directly or through several intermediate steps)
by something similar which is a part of health; and this, viz. that
which produces the part of health, is the limiting-point--and so too
with a house (the stones are the limiting-point here) and in all other
cases. Therefore, as the saying goes, it is impossible that anything
should be produced if there were nothing existing before. Obviously
then some part of the result will pre-exist of necessity; for the
matter is a part; for this is present in the process and it is this
that becomes something. But is the matter an element even in the formula?
We certainly describe in both ways what brazen circles are; we describe
both the matter by saying it is brass, and the form by saying that
it is such and such a figure; and figure is the proximate genus in
which it is placed. The brazen circle, then, has its matter in its
formula. 

"As for that out of which as matter they are produced, some things
are said, when they have been produced, to be not that but 'thaten';
e.g. the statue is not gold but golden. And a healthy man is not said
to be that from which he has come. The reason is that though a thing
comes both from its privation and from its substratum, which we call
its matter (e.g. what becomes healthy is both a man and an invalid),
it is said to come rather from its privation (e.g. it is from an invalid
rather than from a man that a healthy subject is produced). And so
the healthy subject is not said to he an invalid, but to be a man,
and the man is said to be healthy. But as for the things whose privation
is obscure and nameless, e.g. in brass the privation of a particular
shape or in bricks and timber the privation of arrangement as a house,
the thing is thought to be produced from these materials, as in the
former case the healthy man is produced from an invalid. And so, as
there also a thing is not said to be that from which it comes, here
the statue is not said to be wood but is said by a verbal change to
be wooden, not brass but brazen, not gold but golden, and the house
is said to be not bricks but bricken (though we should not say without
qualification, if we looked at the matter carefully, even that a statue
is produced from wood or a house from bricks, because coming to be
implies change in that from which a thing comes to be, and not permanence).
It is for this reason, then, that we use this way of speaking.

Part 8 "

"Since anything which is produced is produced by something (and this
I call the starting-point of the production), and from something (and
let this be taken to be not the privation but the matter; for the
meaning we attach to this has already been explained), and since something
is produced (and this is either a sphere or a circle or whatever else
it may chance to be), just as we do not make the substratum (the brass),
so we do not make the sphere, except incidentally, because the brazen
sphere is a sphere and we make the forme. For to make a 'this' is
to make a 'this' out of the substratum in the full sense of the word.
(I mean that to make the brass round is not to make the round or the
sphere, but something else, i.e. to produce this form in something
different from itself. For if we make the form, we must make it out
of something else; for this was assumed. E.g. we make a brazen sphere;
and that in the sense that out of this, which is brass, we make this
other, which is a sphere.) If, then, we also make the substratum itself,
clearly we shall make it in the same way, and the processes of making
will regress to infinity. Obviously then the form also, or whatever
we ought to call the shape present in the sensible thing, is not produced,
nor is there any production of it, nor is the essence produced; for
this is that which is made to be in something else either by art or
by nature or by some faculty. But that there is a brazen sphere, this
we make. For we make it out of brass and the sphere; we bring the
form into this particular matter, and the result is a brazen sphere.
But if the essence of sphere in general is to be produced, something
must be produced out of something. For the product will always have
to be divisible, and one part must be this and another that; I mean
the one must be matter and the other form. If, then, a sphere is 'the
figure whose circumference is at all points equidistant from the centre',
part of this will be the medium in which the thing made will be, and
part will be in that medium, and the whole will be the thing produced,
which corresponds to the brazen sphere. It is obvious, then, from
what has been said, that that which is spoken of as form or substance
is not produced, but the concrete thing which gets its name from this
is produced, and that in everything which is generated matter is present,
and one part of the thing is matter and the other form. 

"Is there, then, a sphere apart from the individual spheres or a house
apart from the bricks? Rather we may say that no 'this' would ever
have been coming to be, if this had been so, but that the 'form' means
the 'such', and is not a 'this'-a definite thing; but the artist makes,
or the father begets, a 'such' out of a 'this'; and when it has been
begotten, it is a 'this such'. And the whole 'this', Callias or Socrates,
is analogous to 'this brazen sphere', but man and animal to 'brazen
sphere' in general. Obviously, then, the cause which consists of the
Forms (taken in the sense in which some maintain the existence of
the Forms, i.e. if they are something apart from the individuals)
is useless, at least with regard to comings-to-be and to substances;
and the Forms need not, for this reason at least, be self-subsistent
substances. In some cases indeed it is even obvious that the begetter
is of the same kind as the begotten (not, however, the same nor one
in number, but in form), i.e. in the case of natural products (for
man begets man), unless something happens contrary to nature, e.g.
the production of a mule by a horse. (And even these cases are similar;
for that which would be found to be common to horse and ass, the genus
next above them, has not received a name, but it would doubtless be
both in fact something like a mule.) Obviously, therefore, it is quite
unnecessary to set up a Form as a pattern (for we should have looked
for Forms in these cases if in any; for these are substances if anything
is so); the begetter is adequate to the making of the product and
to the causing of the form in the matter. And when we have the whole,
such and such a form in this flesh and in these bones, this is Callias
or Socrates; and they are different in virtue of their matter (for
that is different), but the same in form; for their form is indivisible.

Part 9 "

"The question might be raised, why some things are produced spontaneously
as well as by art, e.g. health, while others are not, e.g. a house.
The reason is that in some cases the matter which governs the production
in the making and producing of any work of art, and in which a part
of the product is present,-some matter is such as to be set in motion
by itself and some is not of this nature, and of the former kind some
can move itself in the particular way required, while other matter
is incapable of this; for many things can be set in motion by themselves
but not in some particular way, e.g. that of dancing. The things,
then, whose matter is of this sort, e.g. stones, cannot be moved in
the particular way required, except by something else, but in another
way they can move themselves-and so it is with fire. Therefore some
things will not exist apart from some one who has the art of making
them, while others will; for motion will be started by these things
which have not the art but can themselves be moved by other things
which have not the art or with a motion starting from a part of the
product. 

"And it is clear also from what has been said that in a sense every
product of art is produced from a thing which shares its name (as
natural products are produced), or from a part of itself which shares
its name (e.g. the house is produced from a house, qua produced by
reason; for the art of building is the form of the house), or from
something which contains a art of it,-if we exclude things produced
by accident; for the cause of the thing's producing the product directly
per se is a part of the product. The heat in the movement caused heat
in the body, and this is either health, or a part of health, or is
followed by a part of health or by health itself. And so it is said
to cause health, because it causes that to which health attaches as
a consequence. 

"Therefore, as in syllogisms, substance is the starting-point of everything.
It is from 'what a thing is' that syllogisms start; and from it also
we now find processes of production to start. 

"Things which are formed by nature are in the same case as these products
of art. For the seed is productive in the same way as the things that
work by art; for it has the form potentially, and that from which
the seed comes has in a sense the same name as the offspring only
in a sense, for we must not expect parent and offspring always to
have exactly the same name, as in the production of 'human being'
from 'human' for a 'woman' also can be produced by a 'man'-unless
the offspring be an imperfect form; which is the reason why the parent
of a mule is not a mule. The natural things which (like the artificial
objects previously considered) can be produced spontaneously are those
whose matter can be moved even by itself in the way in which the seed
usually moves it; those things which have not such matter cannot be
produced except from the parent animals themselves. 

"But not only regarding substance does our argument prove that its
form does not come to be, but the argument applies to all the primary
classes alike, i.e. quantity, quality, and the other categories. For
as the brazen sphere comes to be, but not the sphere nor the brass,
and so too in the case of brass itself, if it comes to be, it is its
concrete unity that comes to be (for the matter and the form must
always exist before), so is it both in the case of substance and in
that of quality and quantity and the other categories likewise; for
the quality does not come to be, but the wood of that quality, and
the quantity does not come to be, but the wood or the animal of that
size. But we may learn from these instances a peculiarity of substance,
that there must exist beforehand in complete reality another substance
which produces it, e.g. an animal if an animal is produced; but it
is not necessary that a quality or quantity should pre-exist otherwise
than potentially. 

Part 10 "

"Since a definition is a formula, and every formula has parts, and
as the formula is to the thing, so is the part of the formula to the
part of the thing, the question is already being asked whether the
formula of the parts must be present in the formula of the whole or
not. For in some cases the formulae of the parts are seen to be present,
and in some not. The formula of the circle does not include that of
the segments, but that of the syllable includes that of the letters;
yet the circle is divided into segments as the syllable is into letters.-And
further if the parts are prior to the whole, and the acute angle is
a part of the right angle and the finger a part of the animal, the
acute angle will be prior to the right angle and finger to the man.
But the latter are thought to be prior; for in formula the parts are
explained by reference to them, and in respect also of the power of
existing apart from each other the wholes are prior to the parts.

"Perhaps we should rather say that 'part' is used in several senses.
One of these is 'that which measures another thing in respect of quantity'.
But let this sense be set aside; let us inquire about the parts of
which substance consists. If then matter is one thing, form another,
the compound of these a third, and both the matter and the form and
the compound are substance even the matter is in a sense called part
of a thing, while in a sense it is not, but only the elements of which
the formula of the form consists. E.g. of concavity flesh (for this
is the matter in which it is produced) is not a part, but of snubness
it is a part; and the bronze is a part of the concrete statue, but
not of the statue when this is spoken of in the sense of the form.
(For the form, or the thing as having form, should be said to be the
thing, but the material element by itself must never be said to be
so.) And so the formula of the circle does not include that of the
segments, but the formula of the syllable includes that of the letters;
for the letters are parts of the formula of the form, and not matter,
but the segments are parts in the sense of matter on which the form
supervenes; yet they are nearer the form than the bronze is when roundness
is produced in bronze. But in a sense not even every kind of letter
will be present in the formula of the syllable, e.g. particular waxen
letters or the letters as movements in the air; for in these also
we have already something that is part of the syllable only in the
sense that it is its perceptible matter. For even if the line when
divided passes away into its halves, or the man into bones and muscles
and flesh, it does not follow that they are composed of these as parts
of their essence, but rather as matter; and these are parts of the
concrete thing, but not also of the form, i.e. of that to which the
formula refers; wherefore also they are not present in the formulae.
In one kind of formula, then, the formula of such parts will be present,
but in another it must not be present, where the formula does not
refer to the concrete object. For it is for this reason that some
things have as their constituent principles parts into which they
pass away, while some have not. Those things which are the form and
the matter taken together, e.g. the snub, or the bronze circle, pass
away into these materials, and the matter is a part of them; but those
things which do not involve matter but are without matter, and whose
formulae are formulae of the form only, do not pass away,-either not
at all or at any rate not in this way. Therefore these materials are
principles and parts of the concrete things, while of the form they
are neither parts nor principles. And therefore the clay statue is
resolved into clay and the ball into bronze and Callias into flesh
and bones, and again the circle into its segments; for there is a
sense of 'circle' in which involves matter. For 'circle' is used ambiguously,
meaning both the circle, unqualified, and the individual circle, because
there is no name peculiar to the individuals. 

"The truth has indeed now been stated, but still let us state it yet
more clearly, taking up the question again. The parts of the formula,
into which the formula is divided, are prior to it, either all or
some of them. The formula of the right angle, however, does not include
the formula of the acute, but the formula of the acute includes that
of the right angle; for he who defines the acute uses the right angle;
for the acute is 'less than a right angle'. The circle and the semicircle
also are in a like relation; for the semicircle is defined by the
circle; and so is the finger by the whole body, for a finger is 'such
and such a part of a man'. Therefore the parts which are of the nature
of matter, and into which as its matter a thing is divided, are posterior;
but those which are of the nature of parts of the formula, and of
the substance according to its formula, are prior, either all or some
of them. And since the soul of animals (for this is the substance
of a living being) is their substance according to the formula, i.e.
the form and the essence of a body of a certain kind (at least we
shall define each part, if we define it well, not without reference
to its function, and this cannot belong to it without perception),
so that the parts of soul are prior, either all or some of them, to
the concrete 'animal', and so too with each individual animal; and
the body and parts are posterior to this, the essential substance,
and it is not the substance but the concrete thing that is divided
into these parts as its matter:-this being so, to the concrete thing
these are in a sense prior, but in a sense they are not. For they
cannot even exist if severed from the whole; for it is not a finger
in any and every state that is the finger of a living thing, but a
dead finger is a finger only in name. Some parts are neither prior
nor posterior to the whole, i.e. those which are dominant and in which
the formula, i.e. the essential substance, is immediately present,
e.g. perhaps the heart or the brain; for it does not matter in the
least which of the two has this quality. But man and horse and terms
which are thus applied to individuals, but universally, are not substance
but something composed of this particular formula and this particular
matter treated as universal; and as regards the individual, Socrates
already includes in him ultimate individual matter; and similarly
in all other cases. 'A part' may be a part either of the form (i.e.
of the essence), or of the compound of the form and the matter, or
of the matter itself. But only the parts of the form are parts of
the formula, and the formula is of the universal; for 'being a circle'
is the same as the circle, and 'being a soul' the same as the soul.
But when we come to the concrete thing, e.g. this circle, i.e. one
of the individual circles, whether perceptible or intelligible (I
mean by intelligible circles the mathematical, and by perceptible
circles those of bronze and of wood),-of these there is no definition,
but they are known by the aid of intuitive thinking or of perception;
and when they pass out of this complete realization it is not clear
whether they exist or not; but they are always stated and recognized
by means of the universal formula. But matter is unknowable in itself.
And some matter is perceptible and some intelligible, perceptible
matter being for instance bronze and wood and all matter that is changeable,
and intelligible matter being that which is present in perceptible
things not qua perceptible, i.e. the objects of mathematics.

"We have stated, then, how matters stand with regard to whole and
part, and their priority and posteriority. But when any one asks whether
the right angle and the circle and the animal are prior, or the things
into which they are divided and of which they consist, i.e. the parts,
we must meet the inquiry by saying that the question cannot be answered
simply. For if even bare soul is the animal or the living thing, or
the soul of each individual is the individual itself, and 'being a
circle' is the circle, and 'being a right angle' and the essence of
the right angle is the right angle, then the whole in one sense must
be called posterior to the art in one sense, i.e. to the parts included
in the formula and to the parts of the individual right angle (for
both the material right angle which is made of bronze, and that which
is formed by individual lines, are posterior to their parts); while
the immaterial right angle is posterior to the parts included in the
formula, but prior to those included in the particular instance, and
the question must not be answered simply. If, however, the soul is
something different and is not identical with the animal, even so
some parts must, as we have maintained, be called prior and others
must not. 

Part 11 "

"Another question is naturally raised, viz. what sort of parts belong
to the form and what sort not to the form, but to the concrete thing.
Yet if this is not plain it is not possible to define any thing; for
definition is of the universal and of the form. If then it is not
evident what sort of parts are of the nature of matter and what sort
are not, neither will the formula of the thing be evident. In the
case of things which are found to occur in specifically different
materials, as a circle may exist in bronze or stone or wood, it seems
plain that these, the bronze or the stone, are no part of the essence
of the circle, since it is found apart from them. Of things which
are not seen to exist apart, there is no reason why the same may not
be true, just as if all circles that had ever been seen were of bronze;
for none the less the bronze would be no part of the form; but it
is hard to eliminate it in thought. E.g. the form of man is always
found in flesh and bones and parts of this kind; are these then also
parts of the form and the formula? No, they are matter; but because
man is not found also in other matters we are unable to perform the
abstraction. 

"Since this is thought to be possible, but it is not clear when it
is the case, some people already raise the question even in the case
of the circle and the triangle, thinking that it is not right to define
these by reference to lines and to the continuous, but that all these
are to the circle or the triangle as flesh and bones are to man, and
bronze or stone to the statue; and they reduce all things to numbers,
and they say the formula of 'line' is that of 'two'. And of those
who assert the Ideas some make 'two' the line-itself, and others make
it the Form of the line; for in some cases they say the Form and that
of which it is the Form are the same, e.g. 'two' and the Form of two;
but in the case of 'line' they say this is no longer so.

"It follows then that there is one Form for many things whose form
is evidently different (a conclusion which confronted the Pythagoreans
also); and it is possible to make one thing the Form-itself of all,
and to hold that the others are not Forms; but thus all things will
be one. 

"We have pointed out, then, that the question of definitions contains
some difficulty, and why this is so. And so to reduce all things thus
to Forms and to eliminate the matter is useless labour; for some things
surely are a particular form in a particular matter, or particular
things in a particular state. And the comparison which Socrates the
younger used to make in the case of 'animal' is not sound; for it
leads away from the truth, and makes one suppose that man can possibly
exist without his parts, as the circle can without the bronze. But
the case is not similar; for an animal is something perceptible, and
it is not possible to define it without reference to movement-nor,
therefore, without reference to the parts' being in a certain state.
For it is not a hand in any and every state that is a part of man,
but only when it can fulfil its work, and therefore only when it is
alive; if it is not alive it is not a part. 

"Regarding the objects of mathematics, why are the formulae of the
parts not parts of the formulae of the wholes; e.g. why are not the
semicircles included in the formula of the circle? It cannot be said,
'because these parts are perceptible things'; for they are not. But
perhaps this makes no difference; for even some things which are not
perceptible must have matter; indeed there is some matter in everything
which is not an essence and a bare form but a 'this'. The semicircles,
then, will not be parts of the universal circle, but will be parts
of the individual circles, as has been said before; for while one
kind of matter is perceptible, there is another which is intelligible.

"It is clear also that the soul is the primary substance and the body
is matter, and man or animal is the compound of both taken universally;
and 'Socrates' or 'Coriscus', if even the soul of Socrates may be
called Socrates, has two meanings (for some mean by such a term the
soul, and others mean the concrete thing), but if 'Socrates' or 'Coriscus'
means simply this particular soul and this particular body, the individual
is analogous to the universal in its composition. 

"Whether there is, apart from the matter of such substances, another
kind of matter, and one should look for some substance other than
these, e.g. numbers or something of the sort, must be considered later.
For it is for the sake of this that we are trying to determine the
nature of perceptible substances as well, since in a sense the inquiry
about perceptible substances is the work of physics, i.e. of second
philosophy; for the physicist must come to know not only about the
matter, but also about the substance expressed in the formula, and
even more than about the other. And in the case of definitions, how
the elements in the formula are parts of the definition, and why the
definition is one formula (for clearly the thing is one, but in virtue
of what is the thing one, although it has parts?),-this must be considered
later. 

"What the essence is and in what sense it is independent, has been
stated universally in a way which is true of every case, and also
why the formula of the essence of some things contains the parts of
the thing defined, while that of others does not. And we have stated
that in the formula of the substance the material parts will not be
present (for they are not even parts of the substance in that sense,
but of the concrete substance; but of this there is in a sense a formula,
and in a sense there is not; for there is no formula of it with its
matter, for this is indefinite, but there is a formula of it with
reference to its primary substance-e.g. in the case of man the formula
of the soul-, for the substance is the indwelling form, from which
and the matter the so-called concrete substance is derived; e.g. concavity
is a form of this sort, for from this and the nose arise 'snub nose'
and 'snubness'); but in the concrete substance, e.g. a snub nose or
Callias, the matter also will be present. And we have stated that
the essence and the thing itself are in some cases the same; ie. in
the case of primary substances, e.g. curvature and the essence of
curvature if this is primary. (By a 'primary' substance I mean one
which does not imply the presence of something in something else,
i.e. in something that underlies it which acts as matter.) But things
which are of the nature of matter, or of wholes that include matter,
are not the same as their essences, nor are accidental unities like
that of 'Socrates' and 'musical'; for these are the same only by accident.

Part 12 "

"Now let us treat first of definition, in so far as we have not treated
of it in the Analytics; for the problem stated in them is useful for
our inquiries concerning substance. I mean this problem:-wherein can
consist the unity of that, the formula of which we call a definition,
as for instance, in the case of man, 'two-footed animal'; for let
this be the formula of man. Why, then, is this one, and not many,
viz. 'animal' and 'two-footed'? For in the case of 'man' and 'pale'
there is a plurality when one term does not belong to the other, but
a unity when it does belong and the subject, man, has a certain attribute;
for then a unity is produced and we have 'the pale man'. In the present
case, on the other hand, one does not share in the other; the genus
is not thought to share in its differentiae (for then the same thing
would share in contraries; for the differentiae by which the genus
is divided are contrary). And even if the genus does share in them,
the same argument applies, since the differentiae present in man are
many, e.g. endowed with feet, two-footed, featherless. Why are these
one and not many? Not because they are present in one thing; for on
this principle a unity can be made out of all the attributes of a
thing. But surely all the attributes in the definition must be one;
for the definition is a single formula and a formula of substance,
so that it must be a formula of some one thing; for substance means
a 'one' and a 'this', as we maintain. 

"We must first inquire about definitions reached by the method of
divisions. There is nothing in the definition except the first-named
and the differentiae. The other genera are the first genus and along
with this the differentiae that are taken with it, e.g. the first
may be 'animal', the next 'animal which is two-footed', and again
'animal which is two-footed and featherless', and similarly if the
definition includes more terms. And in general it makes no difference
whether it includes many or few terms,-nor, therefore, whether it
includes few or simply two; and of the two the one is differentia
and the other genus; e.g. in 'two-footed animal' 'animal' is genus,
and the other is differentia. 

"If then the genus absolutely does not exist apart from the species-of-a-genus,
or if it exists but exists as matter (for the voice is genus and matter,
but its differentiae make the species, i.e. the letters, out of it),
clearly the definition is the formula which comprises the differentiae.

"But it is also necessary that the division be by the differentia
of the diferentia; e.g. 'endowed with feet' is a differentia of 'animal';
again the differentia of 'animal endowed with feet' must be of it
qua endowed with feet. Therefore we must not say, if we are to speak
rightly, that of that which is endowed with feet one part has feathers
and one is featherless (if we do this we do it through incapacity);
we must divide it only into cloven-footed and not cloven; for these
are differentiae in the foot; cloven-footedness is a form of footedness.
And the process wants always to go on so till it reaches the species
that contain no differences. And then there will be as many kinds
of foot as there are differentiae, and the kinds of animals endowed
with feet will be equal in number to the differentiae. If then this
is so, clearly the last differentia will be the substance of the thing
and its definition, since it is not right to state the same things
more than once in our definitions; for it is superfluous. And this
does happen; for when we say 'animal endowed with feet and two-footed'
we have said nothing other than 'animal having feet, having two feet';
and if we divide this by the proper division, we shall be saying the
same thing more than once-as many times as there are differentiae.

"If then a differentia of a differentia be taken at each step, one
differentia-the last-will be the form and the substance; but if we
divide according to accidental qualities, e.g. if we were to divide
that which is endowed with feet into the white and the black, there
will be as many differentiae as there are cuts. Therefore it is plain
that the definition is the formula which contains the differentiae,
or, according to the right method, the last of these. This would be
evident, if we were to change the order of such definitions, e.g.
of that of man, saying 'animal which is two-footed and endowed with
feet'; for 'endowed with feet' is superfluous when 'two-footed' has
been said. But there is no order in the substance; for how are we
to think the one element posterior and the other prior? Regarding
the definitions, then, which are reached by the method of divisions,
let this suffice as our first attempt at stating their nature.

Part 13 "

"Let us return to the subject of our inquiry, which is substance.
As the substratum and the essence and the compound of these are called
substance, so also is the universal. About two of these we have spoken;
both about the essence and about the substratum, of which we have
said that it underlies in two senses, either being a 'this'-which
is the way in which an animal underlies its attributes-or as the matter
underlies the complete reality. The universal also is thought by some
to be in the fullest sense a cause, and a principle; therefore let
us attack the discussion of this point also. For it seems impossible
that any universal term should be the name of a substance. For firstly
the substance of each thing is that which is peculiar to it, which
does not belong to anything else; but the universal is common, since
that is called universal which is such as to belong to more than one
thing. Of which individual then will this be the substance? Either
of all or of none; but it cannot be the substance of all. And if it
is to be the substance of one, this one will be the others also; for
things whose substance is one and whose essence is one are themselves
also one. 

"Further, substance means that which is not predicable of a subject,
but the universal is predicable of some subject always. 

"But perhaps the universal, while it cannot be substance in the way
in which the essence is so, can be present in this; e.g. 'animal'
can be present in 'man' and 'horse'. Then clearly it is a formula
of the essence. And it makes no difference even if it is not a formula
of everything that is in the substance; for none the less the universal
will be the substance of something, as 'man' is the substance of the
individual man in whom it is present, so that the same result will
follow once more; for the universal, e.g. 'animal', will be the substance
of that in which it is present as something peculiar to it. And further
it is impossible and absurd that the 'this', i.e. the substance, if
it consists of parts, should not consist of substances nor of what
is a 'this', but of quality; for that which is not substance, i.e.
the quality, will then be prior to substance and to the 'this'. Which
is impossible; for neither in formula nor in time nor in coming to
be can the modifications be prior to the substance; for then they
will also be separable from it. Further, Socrates will contain a substance
present in a substance, so that this will be the substance of two
things. And in general it follows, if man and such things are substance,
that none of the elements in their formulae is the substance of anything,
nor does it exist apart from the species or in anything else; I mean,
for instance, that no 'animal' exists apart from the particular kinds
of animal, nor does any other of the elements present in formulae
exist apart. 

"If, then, we view the matter from these standpoints, it is plain
that no universal attribute is a substance, and this is plain also
from the fact that no common predicate indicates a 'this', but rather
a 'such'. If not, many difficulties follow and especially the 'third
man'. 

"The conclusion is evident also from the following consideration.
A substance cannot consist of substances present in it in complete
reality; for things that are thus in complete reality two are never
in complete reality one, though if they are potentially two, they
can be one (e.g. the double line consists of two halves-potentially;
for the complete realization of the halves divides them from one another);
therefore if the substance is one, it will not consist of substances
present in it and present in this way, which Democritus describes
rightly; he says one thing cannot be made out of two nor two out of
one; for he identifies substances with his indivisible magnitudes.
It is clear therefore that the same will hold good of number, if number
is a synthesis of units, as is said by some; for two is either not
one, or there is no unit present in it in complete reality. But our
result involves a difficulty. If no substance can consist of universals
because a universal indicates a 'such', not a 'this', and if no substance
can be composed of substances existing in complete reality, every
substance would be incomposite, so that there would not even be a
formula of any substance. But it is thought by all and was stated
long ago that it is either only, or primarily, substance that can
defined; yet now it seems that not even substance can. There cannot,
then, be a definition of anything; or in a sense there can be, and
in a sense there cannot. And what we are saying will be plainer from
what follows. 

Part 14 "

"It is clear also from these very facts what consequence confronts
those who say the Ideas are substances capable of separate existence,
and at the same time make the Form consist of the genus and the differentiae.
For if the Forms exist and 'animal' is present in 'man' and 'horse',
it is either one and the same in number, or different. (In formula
it is clearly one; for he who states the formula will go through the
formula in either case.) If then there is a 'man-in-himself' who is
a 'this' and exists apart, the parts also of which he consists, e.g.
'animal' and 'two-footed', must indicate 'thises', and be capable
of separate existence, and substances; therefore 'animal', as well
as 'man', must be of this sort. 

"Now (1) if the 'animal' in 'the horse' and in 'man' is one and the
same, as you are with yourself, (a) how will the one in things that
exist apart be one, and how will this 'animal' escape being divided
even from itself? 

"Further, (b) if it is to share in 'two-footed' and 'many-footed',
an impossible conclusion follows; for contrary attributes will belong
at the same time to it although it is one and a 'this'. If it is not
to share in them, what is the relation implied when one says the animal
is two-footed or possessed of feet? But perhaps the two things are
'put together' and are 'in contact', or are 'mixed'. Yet all these
expressions are absurd. 

"But (2) suppose the Form to be different in each species. Then there
will be practically an infinite number of things whose substance is
animal'; for it is not by accident that 'man' has 'animal' for one
of its elements. Further, many things will be 'animal-itself'. For
(i) the 'animal' in each species will be the substance of the species;
for it is after nothing else that the species is called; if it were,
that other would be an element in 'man', i.e. would be the genus of
man. And further, (ii) all the elements of which 'man' is composed
will be Ideas. None of them, then, will be the Idea of one thing and
the substance of another; this is impossible. The 'animal', then,
present in each species of animals will be animal-itself. Further,
from what is this 'animal' in each species derived, and how will it
be derived from animal-itself? Or how can this 'animal', whose essence
is simply animality, exist apart from animal-itself? 

"Further, (3)in the case of sensible things both these consequences
and others still more absurd follow. If, then, these consequences
are impossible, clearly there are not Forms of sensible things in
the sense in which some maintain their existence. 

Part 15 "

"Since substance is of two kinds, the concrete thing and the formula
(I mean that one kind of substance is the formula taken with the matter,
while another kind is the formula in its generality), substances in
the former sense are capable of destruction (for they are capable
also of generation), but there is no destruction of the formula in
the sense that it is ever in course of being destroyed (for there
is no generation of it either; the being of house is not generated,
but only the being of this house), but without generation and destruction
formulae are and are not; for it has been shown that no one begets
nor makes these. For this reason, also, there is neither definition
of nor demonstration about sensible individual substances, because
they have matter whose nature is such that they are capable both of
being and of not being; for which reason all the individual instances
of them are destructible. If then demonstration is of necessary truths
and definition is a scientific process, and if, just as knowledge
cannot be sometimes knowledge and sometimes ignorance, but the state
which varies thus is opinion, so too demonstration and definition
cannot vary thus, but it is opinion that deals with that which can
be otherwise than as it is, clearly there can neither be definition
of nor demonstration about sensible individuals. For perishing things
are obscure to those who have the relevant knowledge, when they have
passed from our perception; and though the formulae remain in the
soul unchanged, there will no longer be either definition or demonstration.
And so when one of the definition-mongers defines any individual,
he must recognize that his definition may always be overthrown; for
it is not possible to define such things. 

"Nor is it possible to define any Idea. For the Idea is, as its supporters
say, an individual, and can exist apart; and the formula must consist
of words; and he who defines must not invent a word (for it would
be unknown), but the established words are common to all the members
of a class; these then must apply to something besides the thing defined;
e.g. if one were defining you, he would say 'an animal which is lean'
or 'pale', or something else which will apply also to some one other
than you. If any one were to say that perhaps all the attributes taken
apart may belong to many subjects, but together they belong only to
this one, we must reply first that they belong also to both the elements;
e.g. 'two-footed animal' belongs to animal and to the two-footed.
(And in the case of eternal entities this is even necessary, since
the elements are prior to and parts of the compound; nay more, they
can also exist apart, if 'man' can exist apart. For either neither
or both can. If, then, neither can, the genus will not exist apart
from the various species; but if it does, the differentia will also.)
Secondly, we must reply that 'animal' and 'two-footed' are prior in
being to 'two-footed animal'; and things which are prior to others
are not destroyed when the others are. 

"Again, if the Ideas consist of Ideas (as they must, since elements
are simpler than the compound), it will be further necessary that
the elements also of which the Idea consists, e.g. 'animal' and 'two-footed',
should be predicated of many subjects. If not, how will they come
to be known? For there will then be an Idea which cannot be predicated
of more subjects than one. But this is not thought possible-every
Idea is thought to be capable of being shared. 

"As has been said, then, the impossibility of defining individuals
escapes notice in the case of eternal things, especially those which
are unique, like the sun or the moon. For people err not only by adding
attributes whose removal the sun would survive, e.g. 'going round
the earth' or 'night-hidden' (for from their view it follows that
if it stands still or is visible, it will no longer be the sun; but
it is strange if this is so; for 'the sun' means a certain substance);
but also by the mention of attributes which can belong to another
subject; e.g. if another thing with the stated attributes comes into
existence, clearly it will be a sun; the formula therefore is general.
But the sun was supposed to be an individual, like Cleon or Socrates.
After all, why does not one of the supporters of the Ideas produce
a definition of an Idea? It would become clear, if they tried, that
what has now been said is true. 

Part 16 "

"Evidently even of the things that are thought to be substances, most
are only potencies,-both the parts of animals (for none of them exists
separately; and when they are separated, then too they exist, all
of them, merely as matter) and earth and fire and air; for none of
them is a unity, but as it were a mere heap, till they are worked
up and some unity is made out of them. One might most readily suppose
the parts of living things and the parts of the soul nearly related
to them to turn out to be both, i.e. existent in complete reality
as well as in potency, because they have sources of movement in something
in their joints; for which reason some animals live when divided.
Yet all the parts must exist only potentially, when they are one and
continuous by nature,-not by force or by growing into one, for such
a phenomenon is an abnormality. 

"Since the term 'unity' is used like the term 'being', and the substance
of that which is one is one, and things whose substance is numerically
one are numerically one, evidently neither unity nor being can be
the substance of things, just as being an element or a principle cannot
be the substance, but we ask what, then, the principle is, that we
may reduce the thing to something more knowable. Now of these concepts
'being' and 'unity' are more substantial than 'principle' or 'element'
or 'cause', but not even the former are substance, since in general
nothing that is common is substance; for substance does not belong
to anything but to itself and to that which has it, of which it is
the substance. Further, that which is one cannot be in many places
at the same time, but that which is common is present in many places
at the same time; so that clearly no universal exists apart from its
individuals. 

"But those who say the Forms exist, in one respect are right, in giving
the Forms separate existence, if they are substances; but in another
respect they are not right, because they say the one over many is
a Form. The reason for their doing this is that they cannot declare
what are the substances of this sort, the imperishable substances
which exist apart from the individual and sensible substances. They
make them, then, the same in kind as the perishable things (for this
kind of substance we know)--'man-himself' and 'horse-itself', adding
to the sensible things the word 'itself'. Yet even if we had not seen
the stars, none the less, I suppose, would they have been eternal
substances apart from those which we knew; so that now also if we
do not know what non-sensible substances there are, yet it is doubtless
necessary that there should he some.-Clearly, then, no universal term
is the name of a substance, and no substance is composed of substances.

Part 17 "

"Let us state what, i.e. what kind of thing, substance should be said
to be, taking once more another starting-point; for perhaps from this
we shall get a clear view also of that substance which exists apart
from sensible substances. Since, then, substance is a principle and
a cause, let us pursue it from this starting-point. The 'why' is always
sought in this form--'why does one thing attach to some other?' For
to inquire why the musical man is a musical man, is either to inquire--as
we have said why the man is musical, or it is something else. Now
'why a thing is itself' is a meaningless inquiry (for (to give meaning
to the question 'why') the fact or the existence of the thing must
already be evident-e.g. that the moon is eclipsed-but the fact that
a thing is itself is the single reason and the single cause to be
given in answer to all such questions as why the man is man, or the
musician musical', unless one were to answer 'because each thing is
inseparable from itself, and its being one just meant this'; this,
however, is common to all things and is a short and easy way with
the question). But we can inquire why man is an animal of such and
such a nature. This, then, is plain, that we are not inquiring why
he who is a man is a man. We are inquiring, then, why something is
predicable of something (that it is predicable must be clear; for
if not, the inquiry is an inquiry into nothing). E.g. why does it
thunder? This is the same as 'why is sound produced in the clouds?'
Thus the inquiry is about the predication of one thing of another.
And why are these things, i.e. bricks and stones, a house? Plainly
we are seeking the cause. And this is the essence (to speak abstractly),
which in some cases is the end, e.g. perhaps in the case of a house
or a bed, and in some cases is the first mover; for this also is a
cause. But while the efficient cause is sought in the case of genesis
and destruction, the final cause is sought in the case of being also.

"The object of the inquiry is most easily overlooked where one term
is not expressly predicated of another (e.g. when we inquire 'what
man is'), because we do not distinguish and do not say definitely
that certain elements make up a certain whole. But we must articulate
our meaning before we begin to inquire; if not, the inquiry is on
the border-line between being a search for something and a search
for nothing. Since we must have the existence of the thing as something
given, clearly the question is why the matter is some definite thing;
e.g. why are these materials a house? Because that which was the essence
of a house is present. And why is this individual thing, or this body
having this form, a man? Therefore what we seek is the cause, i.e.
the form, by reason of which the matter is some definite thing; and
this is the substance of the thing. Evidently, then, in the case of
simple terms no inquiry nor teaching is possible; our attitude towards
such things is other than that of inquiry. 

"Since that which is compounded out of something so that the whole
is one, not like a heap but like a syllable-now the syllable is not
its elements, ba is not the same as b and a, nor is flesh fire and
earth (for when these are separated the wholes, i.e. the flesh and
the syllable, no longer exist, but the elements of the syllable exist,
and so do fire and earth); the syllable, then, is something-not only
its elements (the vowel and the consonant) but also something else,
and the flesh is not only fire and earth or the hot and the cold,
but also something else:-if, then, that something must itself be either
an element or composed of elements, (1) if it is an element the same
argument will again apply; for flesh will consist of this and fire
and earth and something still further, so that the process will go
on to infinity. But (2) if it is a compound, clearly it will be a
compound not of one but of more than one (or else that one will be
the thing itself), so that again in this case we can use the same
argument as in the case of flesh or of the syllable. But it would
seem that this 'other' is something, and not an element, and that
it is the cause which makes this thing flesh and that a syllable.
And similarly in all other cases. And this is the substance of each
thing (for this is the primary cause of its being); and since, while
some things are not substances, as many as are substances are formed
in accordance with a nature of their own and by a process of nature,
their substance would seem to be this kind of 'nature', which is not
an element but a principle. An element, on the other hand, is that
into which a thing is divided and which is present in it as matter;
e.g. a and b are the elements of the syllable. 



BOOK VIII

Part 1 

"

"WE must reckon up the results arising from what has been said, and
compute the sum of them, and put the finishing touch to our inquiry.
We have said that the causes, principles, and elements of substances
are the object of our search. And some substances are recognized by
every one, but some have been advocated by particular schools. Those
generally recognized are the natural substances, i.e. fire, earth,
water, air, &c., the simple bodies; second plants and their parts,
and animals and the parts of animals; and finally the physical universe
and its parts; while some particular schools say that Forms and the
objects of mathematics are substances. But there are arguments which
lead to the conclusion that there are other substances, the essence
and the substratum. Again, in another way the genus seems more substantial
than the various spccies, and the universal than the particulars.
And with the universal and the genus the Ideas are connected; it is
in virtue of the same argument that they are thought to be substances.
And since the essence is substance, and the definition is a formula
of the essence, for this reason we have discussed definition and essential
predication. Since the definition is a formula, and a formula has
parts, we had to consider also with respect to the notion of 'part',
what are parts of the substance and what are not, and whether the
parts of the substance are also parts of the definition. Further,
too, neither the universal nor the genus is a substance; we must inquire
later into the Ideas and the objects of mathematics; for some say
these are substances as well as the sensible substances.

"But now let us resume the discussion of the generally recognized
substances. These are the sensible substances, and sensible substances
all have matter. The substratum is substance, and this is in one sense
the matter (and by matter I mean that which, not being a 'this' actually,
is potentially a 'this'), and in another sense the formula or shape
(that which being a 'this' can be separately formulated), and thirdly
the complex of these two, which alone is generated and destroyed,
and is, without qualification, capable of separate existence; for
of substances completely expressible in a formula some are separable
and some are separable and some are not. 

"But clearly matter also is substance; for in all the opposite changes
that occur there is something which underlies the changes, e.g. in
respect of place that which is now here and again elsewhere, and in
respect of increase that which is now of one size and again less or
greater, and in respect of alteration that which is now healthy and
again diseased; and similarly in respect of substance there is something
that is now being generated and again being destroyed, and now underlies
the process as a 'this' and again underlies it in respect of a privation
of positive character. And in this change the others are involved.
But in either one or two of the others this is not involved; for it
is not necessary if a thing has matter for change of place that it
should also have matter for generation and destruction. 

"The difference between becoming in the full sense and becoming in
a qualified sense has been stated in our physical works.

Part 2 "

"Since the substance which exists as underlying and as matter is generally
recognized, and this that which exists potentially, it remains for
us to say what is the substance, in the sense of actuality, of sensible
things. Democritus seems to think there are three kinds of difference
between things; the underlying body, the matter, is one and the same,
but they differ either in rhythm, i.e. shape, or in turning, i.e.
position, or in inter-contact, i.e. order. But evidently there are
many differences; for instance, some things are characterized by the
mode of composition of their matter, e.g. the things formed by blending,
such as honey-water; and others by being bound together, e.g. bundle;
and others by being glued together, e.g. a book; and others by being
nailed together, e.g. a casket; and others in more than one of these
ways; and others by position, e.g. threshold and lintel (for these
differ by being placed in a certain way); and others by time, e.g.
dinner and breakfast; and others by place, e.g. the winds; and others
by the affections proper to sensible things, e.g. hardness and softness,
density and rarity, dryness and wetness; and some things by some of
these qualities, others by them all, and in general some by excess
and some by defect. Clearly, then, the word 'is' has just as many
meanings; a thing is a threshold because it lies in such and such
a position, and its being means its lying in that position, while
being ice means having been solidified in such and such a way. And
the being of some things will be defined by all these qualities, because
some parts of them are mixed, others are blended, others are bound
together, others are solidified, and others use the other differentiae;
e.g. the hand or the foot requires such complex definition. We must
grasp, then, the kinds of differentiae (for these will be the principles
of the being of things), e.g. the things characterized by the more
and the less, or by the dense and the rare, and by other such qualities;
for all these are forms of excess and defect. And anything that is
characterized by shape or by smoothness and roughness is characterized
by the straight and the curved. And for other things their being will
mean their being mixed, and their not being will mean the opposite.

"It is clear, then, from these facts that, since its substance is
the cause of each thing's being, we must seek in these differentiae
what is the cause of the being of each of these things. Now none of
these differentiae is substance, even when coupled with matter, yet
it is what is analogous to substance in each case; and as in substances
that which is predicated of the matter is the actuality itself, in
all other definitions also it is what most resembles full actuality.
E.g. if we had to define a threshold, we should say 'wood or stone
in such and such a position', and a house we should define as 'bricks
and timbers in such and such a position',(or a purpose may exist as
well in some cases), and if we had to define ice we should say 'water
frozen or solidified in such and such a way', and harmony is 'such
and such a blending of high and low'; and similarly in all other cases.

"Obviously, then, the actuality or the formula is different when the
matter is different; for in some cases it is the composition, in others
the mixing, and in others some other of the attributes we have named.
And so, of the people who go in for defining, those who define a house
as stones, bricks, and timbers are speaking of the potential house,
for these are the matter; but those who propose 'a receptacle to shelter
chattels and living beings', or something of the sort, speak of the
actuality. Those who combine both of these speak of the third kind
of substance, which is composed of matter and form (for the formula
that gives the differentiae seems to be an account of the form or
actuality, while that which gives the components is rather an account
of the matter); and the same is true of the kind of definitions which
Archytas used to accept; they are accounts of the combined form and
matter. E.g. what is still weather? Absence of motion in a large expanse
of air; air is the matter, and absence of motion is the actuality
and substance. What is a calm? Smoothness of sea; the material substratum
is the sea, and the actuality or shape is smoothness. It is obvious
then, from what has been said, what sensible substance is and how
it exists-one kind of it as matter, another as form or actuality,
while the third kind is that which is composed of these two.

Part 3 "

"We must not fail to notice that sometimes it is not clear whether
a name means the composite substance, or the actuality or form, e.g.
whether 'house' is a sign for the composite thing, 'a covering consisting
of bricks and stones laid thus and thus', or for the actuality or
form, 'a covering', and whether a line is 'twoness in length' or 'twoness',
and whether an animal is soul in a body' or 'a soul'; for soul is
the substance or actuality of some body. 'Animal' might even be applied
to both, not as something definable by one formula, but as related
to a single thing. But this question, while important for another
purpose, is of no importance for the inquiry into sensible substance;
for the essence certainly attaches to the form and the actuality.
For 'soul' and 'to be soul' are the same, but 'to be man' and 'man'
are not the same, unless even the bare soul is to be called man; and
thus on one interpretation the thing is the same as its essence, and
on another it is not. 

"If we examine we find that the syllable does not consist of the letters
+ juxtaposition, nor is the house bricks + juxtaposition. And this
is right; for the juxtaposition or mixing does not consist of those
things of which it is the juxtaposition or mixing. And the same is
true in all other cases; e.g. if the threshold is characterized by
its position, the position is not constituted by the threshold, but
rather the latter is constituted by the former. Nor is man animal
+ biped, but there must be something besides these, if these are matter,-something
which is neither an element in the whole nor a compound, but is the
substance; but this people eliminate, and state only the matter. If,
then, this is the cause of the thing's being, and if the cause of
its being is its substance, they will not be stating the substance
itself. 

"(This, then, must either be eternal or it must be destructible without
being ever in course of being destroyed, and must have come to be
without ever being in course of coming to be. But it has been proved
and explained elsewhere that no one makes or begets the form, but
it is the individual that is made, i.e. the complex of form and matter
that is generated. Whether the substances of destructible things can
exist apart, is not yet at all clear; except that obviously this is
impossible in some cases-in the case of things which cannot exist
apart from the individual instances, e.g. house or utensil. Perhaps,
indeed, neither these things themselves, nor any of the other things
which are not formed by nature, are substances at all; for one might
say that the nature in natural objects is the only substance to be
found in destructible things.) 

"Therefore the difficulty which used to be raised by the school of
Antisthenes and other such uneducated people has a certain timeliness.
They said that the 'what' cannot be defined (for the definition so
called is a 'long rigmarole') but of what sort a thing, e.g. silver,
is, they thought it possible actually to explain, not saying what
it is, but that it is like tin. Therefore one kind of substance can
be defined and formulated, i.e. the composite kind, whether it be
perceptible or intelligible; but the primary parts of which this consists
cannot be defined, since a definitory formula predicates something
of something, and one part of the definition must play the part of
matter and the other that of form. 

"It is also obvious that, if substances are in a sense numbers, they
are so in this sense and not, as some say, as numbers of units. For
a definition is a sort of number; for (1) it is divisible, and into
indivisible parts (for definitory formulae are not infinite), and
number also is of this nature. And (2) as, when one of the parts of
which a number consists has been taken from or added to the number,
it is no longer the same number, but a different one, even if it is
the very smallest part that has been taken away or added, so the definition
and the essence will no longer remain when anything has been taken
away or added. And (3) the number must be something in virtue of which
it is one, and this these thinkers cannot state, what makes it one,
if it is one (for either it is not one but a sort of heap, or if it
is, we ought to say what it is that makes one out of many); and the
definition is one, but similarly they cannot say what makes it one.
And this is a natural result; for the same reason is applicable, and
substance is one in the sense which we have explained, and not, as
some say, by being a sort of unit or point; each is a complete reality
and a definite nature. And (4) as number does not admit of the more
and the less, neither does substance, in the sense of form, but if
any substance does, it is only the substance which involves matter.
Let this, then, suffice for an account of the generation and destruction
of so-called substances in what sense it is possible and in what sense
impossible--and of the reduction of things to number. 

Part 4 "

"Regarding material substance we must not forget that even if all
things come from the same first cause or have the same things for
their first causes, and if the same matter serves as starting-point
for their generation, yet there is a matter proper to each, e.g. for
phlegm the sweet or the fat, and for bile the bitter, or something
else; though perhaps these come from the same original matter. And
there come to be several matters for the same thing, when the one
matter is matter for the other; e.g. phlegm comes from the fat and
from the sweet, if the fat comes from the sweet; and it comes from
bile by analysis of the bile into its ultimate matter. For one thing
comes from another in two senses, either because it will be found
at a later stage, or because it is produced if the other is analysed
into its original constituents. When the matter is one, different
things may be produced owing to difference in the moving cause; e.g.
from wood may be made both a chest and a bed. But some different things
must have their matter different; e.g. a saw could not be made of
wood, nor is this in the power of the moving cause; for it could not
make a saw of wool or of wood. But if, as a matter of fact, the same
thing can be made of different material, clearly the art, i.e. the
moving principle, is the same; for if both the matter and the moving
cause were different, the product would be so too. 

"When one inquires into the cause of something, one should, since
'causes' are spoken of in several senses, state all the possible causes.
what is the material cause of man? Shall we say 'the menstrual fluid'?
What is moving cause? Shall we say 'the seed'? The formal cause? His
essence. The final cause? His end. But perhaps the latter two are
the same.-It is the proximate causes we must state. What is the material
cause? We must name not fire or earth, but the matter peculiar to
the thing. 

"Regarding the substances that are natural and generable, if the causes
are really these and of this number and we have to learn the causes,
we must inquire thus, if we are to inquire rightly. But in the case
of natural but eternal substances another account must be given. For
perhaps some have no matter, or not matter of this sort but only such
as can be moved in respect of place. Nor does matter belong to those
things which exist by nature but are not substances; their substratum
is the substance. E.g what is the cause of eclipse? What is its matter?
There is none; the moon is that which suffers eclipse. What is the
moving cause which extinguished the light? The earth. The final cause
perhaps does not exist. The formal principle is the definitory formula,
but this is obscure if it does not include the cause. E.g. what is
eclipse? Deprivation of light. But if we add 'by the earth's coming
in between', this is the formula which includes the cause. In the
case of sleep it is not clear what it is that proximately has this
affection. Shall we say that it is the animal? Yes, but the animal
in virtue of what, i.e. what is the proximate subject? The heart or
some other part. Next, by what is it produced? Next, what is the affection-that
of the proximate subject, not of the whole animal? Shall we say that
it is immobility of such and such a kind? Yes, but to what process
in the proximate subject is this due? 

Part 5 "

"Since some things are and are not, without coming to be and ceasing
to be, e.g. points, if they can be said to be, and in general forms
(for it is not 'white' comes to be, but the wood comes to be white,
if everything that comes to be comes from something and comes to be
something), not all contraries can come from one another, but it is
in different senses that a pale man comes from a dark man, and pale
comes from dark. Nor has everything matter, but only those things
which come to be and change into one another. Those things which,
without ever being in course of changing, are or are not, have no
matter. 

"There is difficulty in the question how the matter of each thing
is related to its contrary states. E.g. if the body is potentially
healthy, and disease is contrary to health, is it potentially both
healthy and diseased? And is water potentially wine and vinegar? We
answer that it is the matter of one in virtue of its positive state
and its form, and of the other in virtue of the privation of its positive
state and the corruption of it contrary to its nature. It is also
hard to say why wine is not said to be the matter of vinegar nor potentially
vinegar (though vinegar is produced from it), and why a living man
is not said to be potentially dead. In fact they are not, but the
corruptions in question are accidental, and it is the matter of the
animal that is itself in virtue of its corruption the potency and
matter of a corpse, and it is water that is the matter of vinegar.
For the corpse comes from the animal, and vinegar from wine, as night
from day. And all the things which change thus into one another must
go back to their matter; e.g. if from a corpse is produced an animal,
the corpse first goes back to its matter, and only then becomes an
animal; and vinegar first goes back to water, and only then becomes
wine. 

Part 6 "

"To return to the difficulty which has been stated with respect both
to definitions and to numbers, what is the cause of their unity? In
the case of all things which have several parts and in which the totality
is not, as it were, a mere heap, but the whole is something beside
the parts, there is a cause; for even in bodies contact is the cause
of unity in some cases, and in others viscosity or some other such
quality. And a definition is a set of words which is one not by being
connected together, like the Iliad, but by dealing with one object.-What
then, is it that makes man one; why is he one and not many, e.g. animal
+ biped, especially if there are, as some say, an animal-itself and
a biped-itself? Why are not those Forms themselves the man, so that
men would exist by participation not in man, nor in-one Form, but
in two, animal and biped, and in general man would be not one but
more than one thing, animal and biped? 

"Clearly, then, if people proceed thus in their usual manner of definition
and speech, they cannot explain and solve the difficulty. But if,
as we say, one element is matter and another is form, and one is potentially
and the other actually, the question will no longer be thought a difficulty.
For this difficulty is the same as would arise if 'round bronze' were
the definition of 'cloak'; for this word would be a sign of the definitory
formula, so that the question is, what is the cause of the unity of
'round' and 'bronze'? The difficulty disappears, because the one is
matter, the other form. What, then, causes this-that which was potentially
to be actually-except, in the case of things which are generated,
the agent? For there is no other cause of the potential sphere's becoming
actually a sphere, but this was the essence of either. Of matter some
is intelligible, some perceptible, and in a formula there is always
an element of matter as well as one of actuality; e.g. the circle
is 'a plane figure'. But of the things which have no matter, either
intelligible or perceptible, each is by its nature essentially a kind
of unity, as it is essentially a kind of being-individual substance,
quality, or quantity (and so neither 'existent' nor 'one' is present
in their definitions), and the essence of each of them is by its very
nature a kind of unity as it is a kind of being-and so none of these
has any reason outside itself, for being one, nor for being a kind
of being; for each is by its nature a kind of being and a kind of
unity, not as being in the genus 'being' or 'one' nor in the sense
that being and unity can exist apart from particulars. 

"Owing to the difficulty about unity some speak of 'participation',
and raise the question, what is the cause of participation and what
is it to participate; and others speak of 'communion', as Lycophron
says knowledge is a communion of knowing with the soul; and others
say life is a 'composition' or 'connexion' of soul with body. Yet
the same account applies to all cases; for being healthy, too, will
on this showing be either a 'communion' or a 'connexion' or a 'composition'
of soul and health, and the fact that the bronze is a triangle will
be a 'composition' of bronze and triangle, and the fact that a thing
is white will be a 'composition' of surface and whiteness. The reason
is that people look for a unifying formula, and a difference, between
potency and complete reality. But, as has been said, the proximate
matter and the form are one and the same thing, the one potentially,
and the other actually. Therefore it is like asking what in general
is the cause of unity and of a thing's being one; for each thing is
a unity, and the potential and the actual are somehow one. Therefore
there is no other cause here unless there is something which caused
the movement from potency into actuality. And all things which have
no matter are without qualification essentially unities.



BOOK IX

Part 1 

"

"WE have treated of that which is primarily and to which all the other
categories of being are referred-i.e. of substance. For it is in virtue
of the concept of substance that the others also are said to be-quantity
and quality and the like; for all will be found to involve the concept
of substance, as we said in the first part of our work. And since
'being' is in one way divided into individual thing, quality, and
quantity, and is in another way distinguished in respect of potency
and complete reality, and of function, let us now add a discussion
of potency and complete reality. And first let us explain potency
in the strictest sense, which is, however, not the most useful for
our present purpose. For potency and actuality extend beyond the cases
that involve a reference to motion. But when we have spoken of this
first kind, we shall in our discussions of actuality' explain the
other kinds of potency as well. 

"We have pointed out elsewhere that 'potency' and the word 'can' have
several senses. Of these we may neglect all the potencies that are
so called by an equivocation. For some are called so by analogy, as
in geometry we say one thing is or is not a 'power' of another by
virtue of the presence or absence of some relation between them. But
all potencies that conform to the same type are originative sources
of some kind, and are called potencies in reference to one primary
kind of potency, which is an originative source of change in another
thing or in the thing itself qua other. For one kind is a potency
of being acted on, i.e. the originative source, in the very thing
acted on, of its being passively changed by another thing or by itself
qua other; and another kind is a state of insusceptibility to change
for the worse and to destruction by another thing or by the thing
itself qua other by virtue of an originative source of change. In
all these definitions is implied the formula if potency in the primary
sense.-And again these so-called potencies are potencies either of
merely acting or being acted on, or of acting or being acted on well,
so that even in the formulae of the latter the formulae of the prior
kinds of potency are somehow implied. 

"Obviously, then, in a sense the potency of acting and of being acted
on is one (for a thing may be 'capable' either because it can itself
be acted on or because something else can be acted on by it), but
in a sense the potencies are different. For the one is in the thing
acted on; it is because it contains a certain originative source,
and because even the matter is an originative source, that the thing
acted on is acted on, and one thing by one, another by another; for
that which is oily can be burnt, and that which yields in a particular
way can be crushed; and similarly in all other cases. But the other
potency is in the agent, e.g. heat and the art of building are present,
one in that which can produce heat and the other in the man who can
build. And so, in so far as a thing is an organic unity, it cannot
be acted on by itself; for it is one and not two different things.
And 'impotence'and 'impotent' stand for the privation which is contrary
to potency of this sort, so that every potency belongs to the same
subject and refers to the same process as a corresponding impotence.
Privation has several senses; for it means (1) that which has not
a certain quality and (2) that which might naturally have it but has
not it, either (a) in general or (b) when it might naturally have
it, and either (a) in some particular way, e.g. when it has not it
completely, or (b) when it has not it at all. And in certain cases
if things which naturally have a quality lose it by violence, we say
they have suffered privation. 

Part 2 "

"Since some such originative sources are present in soulless things,
and others in things possessed of soul, and in soul, and in the rational
part of the soul, clearly some potencies will, be non-rational and
some will be non-rational and some will be accompanied by a rational
formula. This is why all arts, i.e. all productive forms of knowledge,
are potencies; they are originative sources of change in another thing
or in the artist himself considered as other. 

"And each of those which are accompanied by a rational formula is
alike capable of contrary effects, but one non-rational power produces
one effect; e.g. the hot is capable only of heating, but the medical
art can produce both disease and health. The reason is that science
is a rational formula, and the same rational formula explains a thing
and its privation, only not in the same way; and in a sense it applies
to both, but in a sense it applies rather to the positive fact. Therefore
such sciences must deal with contraries, but with one in virtue of
their own nature and with the other not in virtue of their nature;
for the rational formula applies to one object in virtue of that object's
nature, and to the other, in a sense, accidentally. For it is by denial
and removal that it exhibits the contrary; for the contrary is the
primary privation, and this is the removal of the positive term. Now
since contraries do not occur in the same thing, but science is a
potency which depends on the possession of a rational formula, and
the soul possesses an originative source of movement; therefore, while
the wholesome produces only health and the calorific only heat and
the frigorific only cold, the scientific man produces both the contrary
effects. For the rational formula is one which applies to both, though
not in the same way, and it is in a soul which possesses an originative
source of movement; so that the soul will start both processes from
the same originative source, having linked them up with the same thing.
And so the things whose potency is according to a rational formula
act contrariwise to the things whose potency is non-rational; for
the products of the former are included under one originative source,
the rational formula. 

"It is obvious also that the potency of merely doing a thing or having
it done to one is implied in that of doing it or having it done well,
but the latter is not always implied in the former: for he who does
a thing well must also do it, but he who does it merely need not also
do it well. 

Part 3 "

"There are some who say, as the Megaric school does, that a thing
'can' act only when it is acting, and when it is not acting it 'cannot'
act, e.g. that he who is not building cannot build, but only he who
is building, when he is building; and so in all other cases. It is
not hard to see the absurdities that attend this view. 

"For it is clear that on this view a man will not be a builder unless
he is building (for to be a builder is to be able to build), and so
with the other arts. If, then, it is impossible to have such arts
if one has not at some time learnt and acquired them, and it is then
impossible not to have them if one has not sometime lost them (either
by forgetfulness or by some accident or by time; for it cannot be
by the destruction of the object, for that lasts for ever), a man
will not have the art when he has ceased to use it, and yet he may
immediately build again; how then will he have got the art? And similarly
with regard to lifeless things; nothing will be either cold or hot
or sweet or perceptible at all if people are not perceiving it; so
that the upholders of this view will have to maintain the doctrine
of Protagoras. But, indeed, nothing will even have perception if it
is not perceiving, i.e. exercising its perception. If, then, that
is blind which has not sight though it would naturally have it, when
it would naturally have it and when it still exists, the same people
will be blind many times in the day-and deaf too. 

"Again, if that which is deprived of potency is incapable, that which
is not happening will be incapable of happening; but he who says of
that which is incapable of happening either that it is or that it
will be will say what is untrue; for this is what incapacity meant.
Therefore these views do away with both movement and becoming. For
that which stands will always stand, and that which sits will always
sit, since if it is sitting it will not get up; for that which, as
we are told, cannot get up will be incapable of getting up. But we
cannot say this, so that evidently potency and actuality are different
(but these views make potency and actuality the same, and so it is
no small thing they are seeking to annihilate), so that it is possible
that a thing may be capable of being and not he, and capable of not
being and yet he, and similarly with the other kinds of predicate;
it may be capable of walking and yet not walk, or capable of not walking
and yet walk. And a thing is capable of doing something if there will
be nothing impossible in its having the actuality of that of which
it is said to have the capacity. I mean, for instance, if a thing
is capable of sitting and it is open to it to sit, there will be nothing
impossible in its actually sitting; and similarly if it is capable
of being moved or moving, or of standing or making to stand, or of
being or coming to be, or of not being or not coming to be.

"The word 'actuality', which we connect with 'complete reality', has,
in the main, been extended from movements to other things; for actuality
in the strict sense is thought to be identical with movement. And
so people do not assign movement to non-existent things, though they
do assign some other predicates. E.g. they say that non-existent things
are objects of thought and desire, but not that they are moved; and
this because, while ex hypothesi they do not actually exist, they
would have to exist actually if they were moved. For of non-existent
things some exist potentially; but they do not exist, because they
do not exist in complete reality. 

Part 4 "

"If what we have described is identical with the capable or convertible
with it, evidently it cannot be true to say 'this is capable of being
but will not be', which would imply that the things incapable of being
would on this showing vanish. Suppose, for instance, that a man-one
who did not take account of that which is incapable of being-were
to say that the diagonal of the square is capable of being measured
but will not be measured, because a thing may well be capable of being
or coming to be, and yet not be or be about to be. But from the premisses
this necessarily follows, that if we actually supposed that which
is not, but is capable of being, to be or to have come to be, there
will be nothing impossible in this; but the result will be impossible,
for the measuring of the diagonal is impossible. For the false and
the impossible are not the same; that you are standing now is false,
but that you should be standing is not impossible. 

"At the same time it is clear that if, when A is real, B must be real,
then, when A is possible, B also must be possible. For if B need not
be possible, there is nothing to prevent its not being possible. Now
let A be supposed possible. Then, when A was possible, we agreed that
nothing impossible followed if A were supposed to be real; and then
B must of course be real. But we supposed B to be impossible. Let
it be impossible then. If, then, B is impossible, A also must be so.
But the first was supposed impossible; therefore the second also is
impossible. If, then, A is possible, B also will be possible, if they
were so related that if A,is real, B must be real. If, then, A and
B being thus related, B is not possible on this condition, and B will
not be related as was supposed. And if when A is possible, B must
be possible, then if A is real, B also must be real. For to say that
B must be possible, if A is possible, means this, that if A is real
both at the time when and in the way in which it was supposed capable
of being real, B also must then and in that way be real.

Part 5 "

"As all potencies are either innate, like the senses, or come by practice,
like the power of playing the flute, or by learning, like artistic
power, those which come by practice or by rational formula we must
acquire by previous exercise but this is not necessary with those
which are not of this nature and which imply passivity. 

"Since that which is 'capable' is capable of something and at some
time in some way (with all the other qualifications which must be
present in the definition), and since some things can produce change
according to a rational formula and their potencies involve such a
formula, while other things are nonrational and their potencies are
non-rational, and the former potencies must be in a living thing,
while the latter can be both in the living and in the lifeless; as
regards potencies of the latter kind, when the agent and the patient
meet in the way appropriate to the potency in question, the one must
act and the other be acted on, but with the former kind of potency
this is not necessary. For the nonrational potencies are all productive
of one effect each, but the rational produce contrary effects, so
that if they produced their effects necessarily they would produce
contrary effects at the same time; but this is impossible. There must,
then, be something else that decides; I mean by this, desire or will.
For whichever of two things the animal desires decisively, it will
do, when it is present, and meets the passive object, in the way appropriate
to the potency in question. Therefore everything which has a rational
potency, when it desires that for which it has a potency and in the
circumstances in which it has the potency, must do this. And it has
the potency in question when the passive object is present and is
in a certain state; if not it will not be able to act. (To add the
qualification 'if nothing external prevents it' is not further necessary;
for it has the potency on the terms on which this is a potency of
acting, and it is this not in all circumstances but on certain conditions,
among which will be the exclusion of external hindrances; for these
are barred by some of the positive qualifications.) And so even if
one has a rational wish, or an appetite, to do two things or contrary
things at the same time, one will not do them; for it is not on these
terms that one has the potency for them, nor is it a potency of doing
both at the same time, since one will do the things which it is a
potency of doing, on the terms on which one has the potency.

Part 6 "

"Since we have treated of the kind of potency which is related to
movement, let us discuss actuality-what, and what kind of thing, actuality
is. For in the course of our analysis it will also become clear, with
regard to the potential, that we not only ascribe potency to that
whose nature it is to move something else, or to be moved by something
else, either without qualification or in some particular way, but
also use the word in another sense, which is the reason of the inquiry
in the course of which we have discussed these previous senses also.
Actuality, then, is the existence of a thing not in the way which
we express by 'potentially'; we say that potentially, for instance,
a statue of Hermes is in the block of wood and the half-line is in
the whole, because it might be separated out, and we call even the
man who is not studying a man of science, if he is capable of studying;
the thing that stands in contrast to each of these exists actually.
Our meaning can be seen in the particular cases by induction, and
we must not seek a definition of everything but be content to grasp
the analogy, that it is as that which is building is to that which
is capable of building, and the waking to the sleeping, and that which
is seeing to that which has its eyes shut but has sight, and that
which has been shaped out of the matter to the matter, and that which
has been wrought up to the unwrought. Let actuality be defined by
one member of this antithesis, and the potential by the other. But
all things are not said in the same sense to exist actually, but only
by analogy-as A is in B or to B, C is in D or to D; for some are as
movement to potency, and the others as substance to some sort of matter.

"But also the infinite and the void and all similar things are said
to exist potentially and actually in a different sense from that which
applies to many other things, e.g. to that which sees or walks or
is seen. For of the latter class these predicates can at some time
be also truly asserted without qualification; for the seen is so called
sometimes because it is being seen, sometimes because it is capable
of being seen. But the infinite does not exist potentially in the
sense that it will ever actually have separate existence; it exists
potentially only for knowledge. For the fact that the process of dividing
never comes to an end ensures that this activity exists potentially,
but not that the infinite exists separately. 

"Since of the actions which have a limit none is an end but all are
relative to the end, e.g. the removing of fat, or fat-removal, and
the bodily parts themselves when one is making them thin are in movement
in this way (i.e. without being already that at which the movement
aims), this is not an action or at least not a complete one (for it
is not an end); but that movement in which the end is present is an
action. E.g. at the same time we are seeing and have seen, are understanding
and have understood, are thinking and have thought (while it is not
true that at the same time we are learning and have learnt, or are
being cured and have been cured). At the same time we are living well
and have lived well, and are happy and have been happy. If not, the
process would have had sometime to cease, as the process of making
thin ceases: but, as things are, it does not cease; we are living
and have lived. Of these processes, then, we must call the one set
movements, and the other actualities. For every movement is incomplete-making
thin, learning, walking, building; these are movements, and incomplete
at that. For it is not true that at the same time a thing is walking
and has walked, or is building and has built, or is coming to be and
has come to be, or is being moved and has been moved, but what is
being moved is different from what has been moved, and what is moving
from what has moved. But it is the same thing that at the same time
has seen and is seeing, seeing, or is thinking and has thought. The
latter sort of process, then, I call an actuality, and the former
a movement. 

Part 7 "

"What, and what kind of thing, the actual is, may be taken as explained
by these and similar considerations. But we must distinguish when
a thing exists potentially and when it does not; for it is not at
any and every time. E.g. is earth potentially a man? No-but rather
when it has already become seed, and perhaps not even then. It is
just as it is with being healed; not everything can be healed by the
medical art or by luck, but there is a certain kind of thing which
is capable of it, and only this is potentially healthy. And (1) the
delimiting mark of that which as a result of thought comes to exist
in complete reality from having existed potentially is that if the
agent has willed it it comes to pass if nothing external hinders,
while the condition on the other side-viz. in that which is healed-is
that nothing in it hinders the result. It is on similar terms that
we have what is potentially a house; if nothing in the thing acted
on-i.e. in the matter-prevents it from becoming a house, and if there
is nothing which must be added or taken away or changed, this is potentially
a house; and the same is true of all other things the source of whose
becoming is external. And (2) in the cases in which the source of
the becoming is in the very thing which comes to be, a thing is potentially
all those things which it will be of itself if nothing external hinders
it. E.g. the seed is not yet potentially a man; for it must be deposited
in something other than itself and undergo a change. But when through
its own motive principle it has already got such and such attributes,
in this state it is already potentially a man; while in the former
state it needs another motive principle, just as earth is not yet
potentially a statue (for it must first change in order to become
brass.) 

"It seems that when we call a thing not something else but 'thaten'-e.g.
a casket is not 'wood' but 'wooden', and wood is not 'earth' but 'earthen',
and again earth will illustrate our point if it is similarly not something
else but 'thaten'-that other thing is always potentially (in the full
sense of that word) the thing which comes after it in this series.
E.g. a casket is not 'earthen' nor 'earth', but 'wooden'; for this
is potentially a casket and this is the matter of a casket, wood in
general of a casket in general, and this particular wood of this particular
casket. And if there is a first thing, which is no longer, in reference
to something else, called 'thaten', this is prime matter; e.g. if
earth is 'airy' and air is not 'fire' but 'fiery', fire is prime matter,
which is not a 'this'. For the subject or substratum is differentiated
by being a 'this' or not being one; i.e. the substratum of modifications
is, e.g. a man, i.e. a body and a soul, while the modification is
'musical' or 'pale'. (The subject is called, when music comes to be
present in it, not 'music' but 'musical', and the man is not 'paleness'
but 'pale', and not 'ambulation' or 'movement' but 'walking' or 'moving',-which
is akin to the 'thaten'.) Wherever this is so, then, the ultimate
subject is a substance; but when this is not so but the predicate
is a form and a 'this', the ultimate subject is matter and material
substance. And it is only right that 'thaten' should be used with
reference both to the matter and to the accidents; for both are indeterminates.

"We have stated, then, when a thing is to be said to exist potentially
and when it is not. 

Part 8 "

"From our discussion of the various senses of 'prior', it is clear
that actuality is prior to potency. And I mean by potency not only
that definite kind which is said to be a principle of change in another
thing or in the thing itself regarded as other, but in general every
principle of movement or of rest. For nature also is in the same genus
as potency; for it is a principle of movement-not, however, in something
else but in the thing itself qua itself. To all such potency, then,
actuality is prior both in formula and in substantiality; and in time
it is prior in one sense, and in another not. 

"(1) Clearly it is prior in formula; for that which is in the primary
sense potential is potential because it is possible for it to become
active; e.g. I mean by 'capable of building' that which can build,
and by 'capable of seeing' that which can see, and by 'visible' that
which can be seen. And the same account applies to all other cases,
so that the formula and the knowledge of the one must precede the
knowledge of the other. 

"(2) In time it is prior in this sense: the actual which is identical
in species though not in number with a potentially existing thing
is to it. I mean that to this particular man who now exists actually
and to the corn and to the seeing subject the matter and the seed
and that which is capable of seeing, which are potentially a man and
corn and seeing, but not yet actually so, are prior in time; but prior
in time to these are other actually existing things, from which they
were produced. For from the potentially existing the actually existing
is always produced by an actually existing thing, e.g. man from man,
musician by musician; there is always a first mover, and the mover
already exists actually. We have said in our account of substance
that everything that is produced is something produced from something
and by something, and that the same in species as it. 

"This is why it is thought impossible to be a builder if one has built
nothing or a harper if one has never played the harp; for he who learns
to play the harp learns to play it by playing it, and all other learners
do similarly. And thence arose the sophistical quibble, that one who
does not possess a science will be doing that which is the object
of the science; for he who is learning it does not possess it. But
since, of that which is coming to be, some part must have come to
be, and, of that which, in general, is changing, some part must have
changed (this is shown in the treatise on movement), he who is learning
must, it would seem, possess some part of the science. But here too,
then, it is clear that actuality is in this sense also, viz. in order
of generation and of time, prior to potency. 

"But (3) it is also prior in substantiality; firstly, (a) because
the things that are posterior in becoming are prior in form and in
substantiality (e.g. man is prior to boy and human being to seed;
for the one already has its form, and the other has not), and because
everything that comes to be moves towards a principle, i.e. an end
(for that for the sake of which a thing is, is its principle, and
the becoming is for the sake of the end), and the actuality is the
end, and it is for the sake of this that the potency is acquired.
For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they
have sight that they may see. And similarly men have the art of building
that they may build, and theoretical science that they may theorize;
but they do not theorize that they may have theoretical science, except
those who are learning by practice; and these do not theorize except
in a limited sense, or because they have no need to theorize. Further,
matter exists in a potential state, just because it may come to its
form; and when it exists actually, then it is in its form. And the
same holds good in all cases, even those in which the end is a movement.
And so, as teachers think they have achieved their end when they have
exhibited the pupil at work, nature does likewise. For if this is
not the case, we shall have Pauson's Hermes over again, since it will
be hard to say about the knowledge, as about the figure in the picture,
whether it is within or without. For the action is the end, and the
actuality is the action. And so even the word 'actuality' is derived
from 'action', and points to the complete reality. 

"And while in some cases the exercise is the ultimate thing (e.g.
in sight the ultimate thing is seeing, and no other product besides
this results from sight), but from some things a product follows (e.g.
from the art of building there results a house as well as the act
of building), yet none the less the act is in the former case the
end and in the latter more of an end than the potency is. For the
act of building is realized in the thing that is being built, and
comes to be, and is, at the same time as the house. 

"Where, then, the result is something apart from the exercise, the
actuality is in the thing that is being made, e.g. the act of building
is in the thing that is being built and that of weaving in the thing
that is being woven, and similarly in all other cases, and in general
the movement is in the thing that is being moved; but where there
is no product apart from the actuality, the actuality is present in
the agents, e.g. the act of seeing is in the seeing subject and that
of theorizing in the theorizing subject and the life is in the soul
(and therefore well-being also; for it is a certain kind of life).

"Obviously, therefore, the substance or form is actuality. According
to this argument, then, it is obvious that actuality is prior in substantial
being to potency; and as we have said, one actuality always precedes
another in time right back to the actuality of the eternal prime mover.

"But (b) actuality is prior in a stricter sense also; for eternal
things are prior in substance to perishable things, and no eternal
thing exists potentially. The reason is this. Every potency is at
one and the same time a potency of the opposite; for, while that which
is not capable of being present in a subject cannot be present, everything
that is capable of being may possibly not be actual. That, then, which
is capable of being may either be or not be; the same thing, then,
is capable both of being and of not being. And that which is capable
of not being may possibly not be; and that which may possibly not
be is perishable, either in the full sense, or in the precise sense
in which it is said that it possibly may not be, i.e. in respect either
of place or of quantity or quality; 'in the full sense' means 'in
respect of substance'. Nothing, then, which is in the full sense imperishable
is in the full sense potentially existent (though there is nothing
to prevent its being so in some respect, e.g. potentially of a certain
quality or in a certain place); all imperishable things, then, exist
actually. Nor can anything which is of necessity exist potentially;
yet these things are primary; for if these did not exist, nothing
would exist. Nor does eternal movement, if there be such, exist potentially;
and, if there is an eternal mobile, it is not in motion in virtue
of a potentiality, except in respect of 'whence' and 'whither' (there
is nothing to prevent its having matter which makes it capable of
movement in various directions). And so the sun and the stars and
the whole heaven are ever active, and there is no fear that they may
sometime stand still, as the natural philosophers fear they may. Nor
do they tire in this activity; for movement is not for them, as it
is for perishable things, connected with the potentiality for opposites,
so that the continuity of the movement should be laborious; for it
is that kind of substance which is matter and potency, not actuality,
that causes this. 

"Imperishable things are imitated by those that are involved in change,
e.g. earth and fire. For these also are ever active; for they have
their movement of themselves and in themselves. But the other potencies,
according to our previous discussion, are all potencies for opposites;
for that which can move another in this way can also move it not in
this way, i.e. if it acts according to a rational formula; and the
same non-rational potencies will produce opposite results by their
presence or absence. 

"If, then, there are any entities or substances such as the dialecticians
say the Ideas are, there must be something much more scientific than
science-itself and something more mobile than movement-itself; for
these will be more of the nature of actualities, while science-itself
and movement-itself are potencies for these. 

"Obviously, then, actuality is prior both to potency and to every
principle of change. 

Part 9 "

"That the actuality is also better and more valuable than the good
potency is evident from the following argument. Everything of which
we say that it can do something, is alike capable of contraries, e.g.
that of which we say that it can be well is the same as that which
can be ill, and has both potencies at once; for the same potency is
a potency of health and illness, of rest and motion, of building and
throwing down, of being built and being thrown down. The capacity
for contraries, then, is present at the same time; but contraries
cannot be present at the same time, and the actualities also cannot
be present at the same time, e.g. health and illness. Therefore, while
the good must be one of them, the capacity is both alike, or neither;
the actuality, then, is better. Also in the case of bad things the
end or actuality must be worse than the potency; for that which 'can'
is both contraries alike. Clearly, then, the bad does not exist apart
from bad things; for the bad is in its nature posterior to the potency.
And therefore we may also say that in the things which are from the
beginning, i.e. in eternal things, there is nothing bad, nothing defective,
nothing perverted (for perversion is something bad). 

"It is an activity also that geometrical constructions are discovered;
for we find them by dividing. If the figures had been already divided,
the constructions would have been obvious; but as it is they are present
only potentially. Why are the angles of the triangle equal to two
right angles? Because the angles about one point are equal to two
right angles. If, then, the line parallel to the side had been already
drawn upwards, the reason would have been evident to any one as soon
as he saw the figure. Why is the angle in a semicircle in all cases
a right angle? If three lines are equal the two which form the base,
and the perpendicular from the centre-the conclusion is evident at
a glance to one who knows the former proposition. Obviously, therefore,
the potentially existing constructions are discovered by being brought
to actuality; the reason is that the geometer's thinking is an actuality;
so that the potency proceeds from an actuality; and therefore it is
by making constructions that people come to know them (though the
single actuality is later in generation than the corresponding potency).
(See diagram.) 

Part 10 "

"The terms 'being' and 'non-being' are employed firstly with reference
to the categories, and secondly with reference to the potency or actuality
of these or their non-potency or nonactuality, and thirdly in the
sense of true and false. This depends, on the side of the objects,
on their being combined or separated, so that he who thinks the separated
to be separated and the combined to be combined has the truth, while
he whose thought is in a state contrary to that of the objects is
in error. This being so, when is what is called truth or falsity present,
and when is it not? We must consider what we mean by these terms.
It is not because we think truly that you are pale, that you are pale,
but because you are pale we who say this have the truth. If, then,
some things are always combined and cannot be separated, and others
are always separated and cannot be combined, while others are capable
either of combination or of separation, 'being' is being combined
and one, and 'not being' is being not combined but more than one.
Regarding contingent facts, then, the same opinion or the same statement
comes to be false and true, and it is possible for it to be at one
time correct and at another erroneous; but regarding things that cannot
be otherwise opinions are not at one time true and at another false,
but the same opinions are always true or always false. 

"But with regard to incomposites, what is being or not being, and
truth or falsity? A thing of this sort is not composite, so as to
'be' when it is compounded, and not to 'be' if it is separated, like
'that the wood is white' or 'that the diagonal is incommensurable';
nor will truth and falsity be still present in the same way as in
the previous cases. In fact, as truth is not the same in these cases,
so also being is not the same; but (a) truth or falsity is as follows--contact
and assertion are truth (assertion not being the same as affirmation),
and ignorance is non-contact. For it is not possible to be in error
regarding the question what a thing is, save in an accidental sense;
and the same holds good regarding non-composite substances (for it
is not possible to be in error about them). And they all exist actually,
not potentially; for otherwise they would have come to be and ceased
to be; but, as it is, being itself does not come to be (nor cease
to be); for if it had done so it would have had to come out of something.
About the things, then, which are essences and actualities, it is
not possible to be in error, but only to know them or not to know
them. But we do inquire what they are, viz. whether they are of such
and such a nature or not. 

"(b) As regards the 'being' that answers to truth and the 'non-being'
that answers to falsity, in one case there is truth if the subject
and the attribute are really combined, and falsity if they are not
combined; in the other case, if the object is existent it exists in
a particular way, and if it does not exist in this way does not exist
at all. And truth means knowing these objects, and falsity does not
exist, nor error, but only ignorance-and not an ignorance which is
like blindness; for blindness is akin to a total absence of the faculty
of thinking. 

"It is evident also that about unchangeable things there can be no
error in respect of time, if we assume them to be unchangeable. E.g.
if we suppose that the triangle does not change, we shall not suppose
that at one time its angles are equal to two right angles while at
another time they are not (for that would imply change). It is possible,
however, to suppose that one member of such a class has a certain
attribute and another has not; e.g. while we may suppose that no even
number is prime, we may suppose that some are and some are not. But
regarding a numerically single number not even this form of error
is possible; for we cannot in this case suppose that one instance
has an attribute and another has not, but whether our judgement be
true or false, it is implied that the fact is eternal. 



BOOK X

Part 1 

"

"WE have said previously, in our distinction of the various meanings
of words, that 'one' has several meanings; the things that are directly
and of their own nature and not accidentally called one may be summarized
under four heads, though the word is used in more senses. (1) There
is the continuous, either in general, or especially that which is
continuous by nature and not by contact nor by being together; and
of these, that has more unity and is prior, whose movement is more
indivisible and simpler. (2) That which is a whole and has a certain
shape and form is one in a still higher degree; and especially if
a thing is of this sort by nature, and not by force like the things
which are unified by glue or nails or by being tied together, i.e.
if it has in itself the cause of its continuity. A thing is of this
sort because its movement is one and indivisible in place and time;
so that evidently if a thing has by nature a principle of movement
that is of the first kind (i.e. local movement) and the first in that
kind (i.e. circular movement), this is in the primary sense one extended
thing. Some things, then, are one in this way, qua continuous or whole,
and the other things that are one are those whose definition is one.
Of this sort are the things the thought of which is one, i.e. those
the thought of which is indivisible; and it is indivisible if the
thing is indivisible in kind or in number. (3) In number, then, the
individual is indivisible, and (4) in kind, that which in intelligibility
and in knowledge is indivisible, so that that which causes substances
to be one must be one in the primary sense. 'One', then, has all these
meanings-the naturally continuous and the whole, and the individual
and the universal. And all these are one because in some cases the
movement, in others the thought or the definition is indivisible.

"But it must be observed that the questions, what sort of things are
said to be one, and what it is to be one and what is the definition
of it, should not be assumed to be the same. 'One' has all these meanings,
and each of the things to which one of these kinds of unity belongs
will be one; but 'to be one' will sometimes mean being one of these
things, and sometimes being something else which is even nearer to
the meaning of the word 'one' while these other things approximate
to its application. This is also true of 'element' or 'cause', if
one had both to specify the things of which it is predicable and to
render the definition of the word. For in a sense fire is an element
(and doubtless also 'the indefinite' or something else of the sort
is by its own nature the element), but in a sense it is not; for it
is not the same thing to be fire and to be an element, but while as
a particular thing with a nature of its own fire is an element, the
name 'element' means that it has this attribute, that there is something
which is made of it as a primary constituent. And so with 'cause'
and 'one' and all such terms. For this reason, too, 'to be one' means
'to be indivisible, being essentially one means a "this" and capable
of being isolated either in place, or in form or thought'; or perhaps
'to be whole and indivisible'; but it means especially 'to be the
first measure of a kind', and most strictly of quantity; for it is
from this that it has been extended to the other categories. For measure
is that by which quantity is known; and quantity qua quantity is known
either by a 'one' or by a number, and all number is known by a 'one'.
Therefore all quantity qua quantity is known by the one, and that
by which quantities are primarily known is the one itself; and so
the one is the starting-point of number qua number. And hence in the
other classes too 'measure' means that by which each is first known,
and the measure of each is a unit-in length, in breadth, in depth,
in weight, in speed. (The words 'weight' and 'speed' are common to
both contraries; for each of them has two meanings-'weight' means
both that which has any amount of gravity and that which has an excess
of gravity, and 'speed' both that which has any amount of movement
and that which has an excess of movement; for even the slow has a
certain speed and the comparatively light a certain weight.)

"In all these, then, the measure and starting-point is something one
and indivisible, since even in lines we treat as indivisible the line
a foot long. For everywhere we seek as the measure something one and
indivisible; and this is that which is simple either in quality or
in quantity. Now where it is thought impossible to take away or to
add, there the measure is exact (hence that of number is most exact;
for we posit the unit as indivisible in every respect); but in all
other cases we imitate this sort of measure. For in the case of a
furlong or a talent or of anything comparatively large any addition
or subtraction might more easily escape our notice than in the case
of something smaller; so that the first thing from which, as far as
our perception goes, nothing can be subtracted, all men make the measure,
whether of liquids or of solids, whether of weight or of size; and
they think they know the quantity when they know it by means of this
measure. And indeed they know movement too by the simple movement
and the quickest; for this occupies least time. And so in astronomy
a 'one' of this sort is the starting-point and measure (for they assume
the movement of the heavens to be uniform and the quickest, and judge
the others by reference to it), and in music the quarter-tone (because
it is the least interval), and in speech the letter. And all these
are ones in this sense--not that 'one' is something predicable in
the same sense of all of these, but in the sense we have mentioned.

"But the measure is not always one in number--sometimes there are
several; e.g. the quarter-tones (not to the ear, but as determined
by the ratios) are two, and the articulate sounds by which we measure
are more than one, and the diagonal of the square and its side are
measured by two quantities, and all spatial magnitudes reveal similar
varieties of unit. Thus, then, the one is the measure of all things,
because we come to know the elements in the substance by dividing
the things either in respect of quantity or in respect of kind. And
the one is indivisible just because the first of each class of things
is indivisible. But it is not in the same way that every 'one' is
indivisible e.g. a foot and a unit; the latter is indivisible in every
respect, while the former must be placed among things which are undivided
to perception, as has been said already-only to perception, for doubtless
every continuous thing is divisible. 

"The measure is always homogeneous with the thing measured; the measure
of spatial magnitudes is a spatial magnitude, and in particular that
of length is a length, that of breadth a breadth, that of articulate
sound an articulate sound, that of weight a weight, that of units
a unit. (For we must state the matter so, and not say that the measure
of numbers is a number; we ought indeed to say this if we were to
use the corresponding form of words, but the claim does not really
correspond-it is as if one claimed that the measure of units is units
and not a unit; number is a plurality of units.) 

"Knowledge, also, and perception, we call the measure of things for
the same reason, because we come to know something by them-while as
a matter of fact they are measured rather than measure other things.
But it is with us as if some one else measured us and we came to know
how big we are by seeing that he applied the cubit-measure to such
and such a fraction of us. But Protagoras says 'man is the measure
of all things', as if he had said 'the man who knows' or 'the man
who perceives'; and these because they have respectively knowledge
and perception, which we say are the measures of objects. Such thinkers
are saying nothing, then, while they appear to be saying something
remarkable. 

"Evidently, then, unity in the strictest sense, if we define it according
to the meaning of the word, is a measure, and most properly of quantity,
and secondly of quality. And some things will be one if they are indivisible
in quantity, and others if they are indivisible in quality; and so
that which is one is indivisible, either absolutely or qua one.

Part 2 "

"With regard to the substance and nature of the one we must ask in
which of two ways it exists. This is the very question that we reviewed
in our discussion of problems, viz. what the one is and how we must
conceive of it, whether we must take the one itself as being a substance
(as both the Pythagoreans say in earlier and Plato in later times),
or there is, rather, an underlying nature and the one should be described
more intelligibly and more in the manner of the physical philosophers,
of whom one says the one is love, another says it is air, and another
the indefinite. 

"If, then, no universal can be a substance, as has been said our discussion
of substance and being, and if being itself cannot be a substance
in the sense of a one apart from the many (for it is common to the
many), but is only a predicate, clearly unity also cannot be a substance;
for being and unity are the most universal of all predicates. Therefore,
on the one hand, genera are not certain entities and substances separable
from other things; and on the other hand the one cannot be a genus,
for the same reasons for which being and substance cannot be genera.

"Further, the position must be similar in all the kinds of unity.
Now 'unity' has just as many meanings as 'being'; so that since in
the sphere of qualities the one is something definite-some particular
kind of thing-and similarly in the sphere of quantities, clearly we
must in every category ask what the one is, as we must ask what the
existent is, since it is not enough to say that its nature is just
to be one or existent. But in colours the one is a colour, e.g. white,
and then the other colours are observed to be produced out of this
and black, and black is the privation of white, as darkness of light.
Therefore if all existent things were colours, existent things would
have been a number, indeed, but of what? Clearly of colours; and the
'one' would have been a particular 'one', i.e. white. And similarly
if all existing things were tunes, they would have been a number,
but a number of quarter-tones, and their essence would not have been
number; and the one would have been something whose substance was
not to be one but to be the quarter-tone. And similarly if all existent
things had been articulate sounds, they would have been a number of
letters, and the one would have been a vowel. And if all existent
things were rectilinear figures, they would have been a number of
figures, and the one would have been the triangle. And the same argument
applies to all other classes. Since, therefore, while there are numbers
and a one both in affections and in qualities and in quantities and
in movement, in all cases the number is a number of particular things
and the one is one something, and its substance is not just to be
one, the same must be true of substances also; for it is true of all
cases alike. 

"That the one, then, in every class is a definite thing, and in no
case is its nature just this, unity, is evident; but as in colours
the one-itself which we must seek is one colour, so too in substance
the one-itself is one substance. That in a sense unity means the same
as being is clear from the facts that its meanings correspond to the
categories one to one, and it is not comprised within any category
(e.g. it is comprised neither in 'what a thing is' nor in quality,
but is related to them just as being is); that in 'one man' nothing
more is predicated than in 'man' (just as being is nothing apart from
substance or quality or quantity); and that to be one is just to be
a particular thing. 

Part 3 "

"The one and the many are opposed in several ways, of which one is
the opposition of the one and plurality as indivisible and divisible;
for that which is either divided or divisible is called a plurality,
and that which is indivisible or not divided is called one. Now since
opposition is of four kinds, and one of these two terms is privative
in meaning, they must be contraries, and neither contradictory nor
correlative in meaning. And the one derives its name and its explanation
from its contrary, the indivisible from the divisible, because plurality
and the divisible is more perceptible than the indivisible, so that
in definition plurality is prior to the indivisible, because of the
conditions of perception. 

"To the one belong, as we indicated graphically in our distinction
of the contraries, the same and the like and the equal, and to plurality
belong the other and the unlike and the unequal. 'The same' has several
meanings; (1) we sometimes mean 'the same numerically'; again, (2)
we call a thing the same if it is one both in definition and in number,
e.g. you are one with yourself both in form and in matter; and again,
(3) if the definition of its primary essence is one; e.g. equal straight
lines are the same, and so are equal and equal-angled quadrilaterals;
there are many such, but in these equality constitutes unity.

"Things are like if, not being absolutely the same, nor without difference
in respect of their concrete substance, they are the same in form;
e.g. the larger square is like the smaller, and unequal straight lines
are like; they are like, but not absolutely the same. Other things
are like, if, having the same form, and being things in which difference
of degree is possible, they have no difference of degree. Other things,
if they have a quality that is in form one and same-e.g. whiteness-in
a greater or less degree, are called like because their form is one.
Other things are called like if the qualities they have in common
are more numerous than those in which they differ-either the qualities
in general or the prominent qualities; e.g. tin is like silver, qua
white, and gold is like fire, qua yellow and red. 

"Evidently, then, 'other' and 'unlike' also have several meanings.
And the other in one sense is the opposite of the same (so that everything
is either the same as or other than everything else). In another sense
things are other unless both their matter and their definition are
one (so that you are other than your neighbour). The other in the
third sense is exemplified in the objects of mathematics. 'Other or
the same' can therefore be predicated of everything with regard to
everything else-but only if the things are one and existent, for 'other'
is not the contradictory of 'the same'; which is why it is not predicated
of non-existent things (while 'not the same' is so predicated). It
is predicated of all existing things; for everything that is existent
and one is by its very nature either one or not one with anything
else. 

"The other, then, and the same are thus opposed. But difference is
not the same as otherness. For the other and that which it is other
than need not be other in some definite respect (for everything that
is existent is either other or the same), but that which is different
is different from some particular thing in some particular respect,
so that there must be something identical whereby they differ. And
this identical thing is genus or species; for everything that differs
differs either in genus or in species, in genus if the things have
not their matter in common and are not generated out of each other
(i.e. if they belong to different figures of predication), and in
species if they have the same genus ('genus' meaning that identical
thing which is essentially predicated of both the different things).

"Contraries are different, and contrariety is a kind of difference.
That we are right in this supposition is shown by induction. For all
of these too are seen to be different; they are not merely other,
but some are other in genus, and others are in the same line of predication,
and therefore in the same genus, and the same in genus. We have distinguished
elsewhere what sort of things are the same or other in genus.

Part 4 "

"Since things which differ may differ from one another more or less,
there is also a greatest difference, and this I call contrariety.
That contrariety is the greatest difference is made clear by induction.
For things which differ in genus have no way to one another, but are
too far distant and are not comparable; and for things that differ
in species the extremes from which generation takes place are the
contraries, and the distance between extremes-and therefore that between
the contraries-is the greatest. 

"But surely that which is greatest in each class is complete. For
that is greatest which cannot be exceeded, and that is complete beyond
which nothing can be found. For the complete difference marks the
end of a series (just as the other things which are called complete
are so called because they have attained an end), and beyond the end
there is nothing; for in everything it is the extreme and includes
all else, and therefore there is nothing beyond the end, and the complete
needs nothing further. From this, then, it is clear that contrariety
is complete difference; and as contraries are so called in several
senses, their modes of completeness will answer to the various modes
of contrariety which attach to the contraries. 

"This being so, it is clear that one thing have more than one contrary
(for neither can there be anything more extreme than the extreme,
nor can there be more than two extremes for the one interval), and,
to put the matter generally, this is clear if contrariety is a difference,
and if difference, and therefore also the complete difference, must
be between two things. 

"And the other commonly accepted definitions of contraries are also
necessarily true. For not only is (1) the complete difference the
greatest difference (for we can get no difference beyond it of things
differing either in genus or in species; for it has been shown that
there is no 'difference' between anything and the things outside its
genus, and among the things which differ in species the complete difference
is the greatest); but also (2) the things in the same genus which
differ most are contrary (for the complete difference is the greatest
difference between species of the same genus); and (3) the things
in the same receptive material which differ most are contrary (for
the matter is the same for contraries); and (4) of the things which
fall under the same faculty the most different are contrary (for one
science deals with one class of things, and in these the complete
difference is the greatest). 

"The primary contrariety is that between positive state and privation-not
every privation, however (for 'privation' has several meanings), but
that which is complete. And the other contraries must be called so
with reference to these, some because they possess these, others because
they produce or tend to produce them, others because they are acquisitions
or losses of these or of other contraries. Now if the kinds of opposition
are contradiction and privation and contrariety and relation, and
of these the first is contradiction, and contradiction admits of no
intermediate, while contraries admit of one, clearly contradiction
and contrariety are not the same. But privation is a kind of contradiction;
for what suffers privation, either in general or in some determinate
way, either that which is quite incapable of having some attribute
or that which, being of such a nature as to have it, has it not; here
we have already a variety of meanings, which have been distinguished
elsewhere. Privation, therefore, is a contradiction or incapacity
which is determinate or taken along with the receptive material. This
is the reason why, while contradiction does not admit of an intermediate,
privation sometimes does; for everything is equal or not equal, but
not everything is equal or unequal, or if it is, it is only within
the sphere of that which is receptive of equality. If, then, the comings-to-be
which happen to the matter start from the contraries, and proceed
either from the form and the possession of the form or from a privation
of the form or shape, clearly all contrariety must be privation, but
presumably not all privation is contrariety (the reason being that
that has suffered privation may have suffered it in several ways);
for it is only the extremes from which changes proceed that are contraries.

"And this is obvious also by induction. For every contrariety involves,
as one of its terms, a privation, but not all cases are alike; inequality
is the privation of equality and unlikeness of likeness, and on the
other hand vice is the privation of virtue. But the cases differ in
a way already described; in one case we mean simply that the thing
has suffered privation, in another case that it has done so either
at a certain time or in a certain part (e.g. at a certain age or in
the dominant part), or throughout. This is why in some cases there
is a mean (there are men who are neither good nor bad), and in others
there is not (a number must be either odd or even). Further, some
contraries have their subject defined, others have not. Therefore
it is evident that one of the contraries is always privative; but
it is enough if this is true of the first-i.e. the generic-contraries,
e.g. the one and the many; for the others can be reduced to these.

Part 5 "

"Since one thing has one contrary, we might raise the question how
the one is opposed to the many, and the equal to the great and the
small. For if we used the word 'whether' only in an antithesis such
as 'whether it is white or black', or 'whether it is white or not
white' (we do not ask 'whether it is a man or white'), unless we are
proceeding on a prior assumption and asking something such as 'whether
it was Cleon or Socrates that came' as this is not a necessary disjunction
in any class of things; yet even this is an extension from the case
of opposites; for opposites alone cannot be present together; and
we assume this incompatibility here too in asking which of the two
came; for if they might both have come, the question would have been
absurd; but if they might, even so this falls just as much into an
antithesis, that of the 'one or many', i.e. 'whether both came or
one of the two':-if, then, the question 'whether' is always concerned
with opposites, and we can ask 'whether it is greater or less or equal',
what is the opposition of the equal to the other two? It is not contrary
either to one alone or to both; for why should it be contrary to the
greater rather than to the less? Further, the equal is contrary to
the unequal. Therefore if it is contrary to the greater and the less,
it will be contrary to more things than one. But if the unequal means
the same as both the greater and the less together, the equal will
be opposite to both (and the difficulty supports those who say the
unequal is a 'two'), but it follows that one thing is contrary to
two others, which is impossible. Again, the equal is evidently intermediate
between the great and the small, but no contrariety is either observed
to be intermediate, or, from its definition, can be so; for it would
not be complete if it were intermediate between any two things, but
rather it always has something intermediate between its own terms.

"It remains, then, that it is opposed either as negation or as privation.
It cannot be the negation or privation of one of the two; for why
of the great rather than of the small? It is, then, the privative
negation of both. This is why 'whether' is said with reference to
both, not to one of the two (e.g. 'whether it is greater or equal'
or 'whether it is equal or less'); there are always three cases. But
it is not a necessary privation; for not everything which is not greater
or less is equal, but only the things which are of such a nature as
to have these attributes. 

"The equal, then, is that which is neither great nor small but is
naturally fitted to be either great or small; and it is opposed to
both as a privative negation (and therefore is also intermediate).
And that which is neither good nor bad is opposed to both, but has
no name; for each of these has several meanings and the recipient
subject is not one; but that which is neither white nor black has
more claim to unity. Yet even this has not one name, though the colours
of which this negation is privatively predicated are in a way limited;
for they must be either grey or yellow or something else of the kind.
Therefore it is an incorrect criticism that is passed by those who
think that all such phrases are used in the same way, so that that
which is neither a shoe nor a hand would be intermediate between a
shoe and a hand, since that which is neither good nor bad is intermediate
between the good and the bad-as if there must be an intermediate in
all cases. But this does not necessarily follow. For the one phrase
is a joint denial of opposites between which there is an intermediate
and a certain natural interval; but between the other two there is
no 'difference'; for the things, the denials of which are combined,
belong to different classes, so that the substratum is not one.

Part 6 "

"We might raise similar questions about the one and the many. For
if the many are absolutely opposed to the one, certain impossible
results follow. One will then be few, whether few be treated here
as singular or plural; for the many are opposed also to the few. Further,
two will be many, since the double is multiple and 'double' derives
its meaning from 'two'; therefore one will be few; for what is that
in comparison with which two are many, except one, which must therefore
be few? For there is nothing fewer. Further, if the much and the little
are in plurality what the long and the short are in length, and whatever
is much is also many, and the many are much (unless, indeed, there
is a difference in the case of an easily-bounded continuum), the little
(or few) will be a plurality. Therefore one is a plurality if it is
few; and this it must be, if two are many. But perhaps, while the
'many' are in a sense said to be also 'much', it is with a difference;
e.g. water is much but not many. But 'many' is applied to the things
that are divisible; in the one sense it means a plurality which is
excessive either absolutely or relatively (while 'few' is similarly
a plurality which is deficient), and in another sense it means number,
in which sense alone it is opposed to the one. For we say 'one or
many', just as if one were to say 'one and ones' or 'white thing and
white things', or to compare the things that have been measured with
the measure. It is in this sense also that multiples are so called.
For each number is said to be many because it consists of ones and
because each number is measurable by one; and it is 'many' as that
which is opposed to one, not to the few. In this sense, then, even
two is many-not, however, in the sense of a plurality which is excessive
either relatively or absolutely; it is the first plurality. But without
qualification two is few; for it is first plurality which is deficient
(for this reason Anaxagoras was not right in leaving the subject with
the statement that 'all things were together, boundless both in plurality
and in smallness'-where for 'and in smallness' he should have said
'and in fewness'; for they could not have been boundless in fewness),
since it is not one, as some say, but two, that make a few.

"The one is opposed then to the many in numbers as measure to thing
measurable; and these are opposed as are the relatives which are not
from their very nature relatives. We have distinguished elsewhere
the two senses in which relatives are so called:-(1) as contraries;
(2) as knowledge to thing known, a term being called relative because
another is relative to it. There is nothing to prevent one from being
fewer than something, e.g. than two; for if one is fewer, it is not
therefore few. Plurality is as it were the class to which number belongs;
for number is plurality measurable by one, and one and number are
in a sense opposed, not as contrary, but as we have said some relative
terms are opposed; for inasmuch as one is measure and the other measurable,
they are opposed. This is why not everything that is one is a number;
i.e. if the thing is indivisible it is not a number. But though knowledge
is similarly spoken of as relative to the knowable, the relation does
not work out similarly; for while knowledge might be thought to be
the measure, and the knowable the thing measured, the fact that all
knowledge is knowable, but not all that is knowable is knowledge,
because in a sense knowledge is measured by the knowable.-Plurality
is contrary neither to the few (the many being contrary to this as
excessive plurality to plurality exceeded), nor to the one in every
sense; but in the one sense these are contrary, as has been said,
because the former is divisible and the latter indivisible, while
in another sense they are relative as knowledge is to knowable, if
plurality is number and the one is a measure. 

Part 7 "

"Since contraries admit of an intermediate and in some cases have
it, intermediates must be composed of the contraries. For (1) all
intermediates are in the same genus as the things between which they
stand. For we call those things intermediates, into which that which
changes must change first; e.g. if we were to pass from the highest
string to the lowest by the smallest intervals, we should come sooner
to the intermediate notes, and in colours if we were to pass from
white to black, we should come sooner to crimson and grey than to
black; and similarly in all other cases. But to change from one genus
to another genus is not possible except in an incidental way, as from
colour to figure. Intermediates, then, must be in the same genus both
as one another and as the things they stand between. 

"But (2) all intermediates stand between opposites of some kind; for
only between these can change take place in virtue of their own nature
(so that an intermediate is impossible between things which are not
opposite; for then there would be change which was not from one opposite
towards the other). Of opposites, contradictories admit of no middle
term; for this is what contradiction is-an opposition, one or other
side of which must attach to anything whatever, i.e. which has no
intermediate. Of other opposites, some are relative, others privative,
others contrary. Of relative terms, those which are not contrary have
no intermediate; the reason is that they are not in the same genus.
For what intermediate could there be between knowledge and knowable?
But between great and small there is one. 

"(3) If intermediates are in the same genus, as has been shown, and
stand between contraries, they must be composed of these contraries.
For either there will be a genus including the contraries or there
will be none. And if (a) there is to be a genus in such a way that
it is something prior to the contraries, the differentiae which constituted
the contrary species-of-a-genus will be contraries prior to the species;
for species are composed of the genus and the differentiae. (E.g.
if white and black are contraries, and one is a piercing colour and
the other a compressing colour, these differentiae-'piercing' and
'compressing'-are prior; so that these are prior contraries of one
another.) But, again, the species which differ contrariwise are the
more truly contrary species. And the other.species, i.e. the intermediates,
must be composed of their genus and their differentiae. (E.g. all
colours which are between white and black must be said to be composed
of the genus, i.e. colour, and certain differentiae. But these differentiae
will not be the primary contraries; otherwise every colour would be
either white or black. They are different, then, from the primary
contraries; and therefore they will be between the primary contraries;
the primary differentiae are 'piercing' and 'compressing'.)

"Therefore it is (b) with regard to these contraries which do not
fall within a genus that we must first ask of what their intermediates
are composed. (For things which are in the same genus must be composed
of terms in which the genus is not an element, or else be themselves
incomposite.) Now contraries do not involve one another in their composition,
and are therefore first principles; but the intermediates are either
all incomposite, or none of them. But there is something compounded
out of the contraries, so that there can be a change from a contrary
to it sooner than to the other contrary; for it will have less of
the quality in question than the one contrary and more than the other.
This also, then, will come between the contraries. All the other intermediates
also, therefore, are composite; for that which has more of a quality
than one thing and less than another is compounded somehow out of
the things than which it is said to have more and less respectively
of the quality. And since there are no other things prior to the contraries
and homogeneous with the intermediates, all intermediates must be
compounded out of the contraries. Therefore also all the inferior
classes, both the contraries and their intermediates, will be compounded
out of the primary contraries. Clearly, then, intermediates are (1)
all in the same genus and (2) intermediate between contraries, and
(3) all compounded out of the contraries. 

Part 8 "

"That which is other in species is other than something in something,
and this must belong to both; e.g. if it is an animal other in species,
both are animals. The things, then, which are other in species must
be in the same genus. For by genus I mean that one identical thing
which is predicated of both and is differentiated in no merely accidental
way, whether conceived as matter or otherwise. For not only must the
common nature attach to the different things, e.g. not only must both
be animals, but this very animality must also be different for each
(e.g. in the one case equinity, in the other humanity), and so this
common nature is specifically different for each from what it is for
the other. One, then, will be in virtue of its own nature one sort
of animal, and the other another, e.g. one a horse and the other a
man. This difference, then, must be an otherness of the genus. For
I give the name of 'difference in the genus' an otherness which makes
the genus itself other. 

"This, then, will be a contrariety (as can be shown also by induction).
For all things are divided by opposites, and it has been proved that
contraries are in the same genus. For contrariety was seen to be complete
difference; and all difference in species is a difference from something
in something; so that this is the same for both and is their genus.
(Hence also all contraries which are different in species and not
in genus are in the same line of predication, and other than one another
in the highest degree-for the difference is complete-, and cannot
be present along with one another.) The difference, then, is a contrariety.

"This, then, is what it is to be 'other in species'-to have a contrariety,
being in the same genus and being indivisible (and those things are
the same in species which have no contrariety, being indivisible);
we say 'being indivisible', for in the process of division contrarieties
arise in the intermediate stages before we come to the indivisibles.
Evidently, therefore, with reference to that which is called the genus,
none of the species-of-a-genus is either the same as it or other than
it in species (and this is fitting; for the matter is indicated by
negation, and the genus is the matter of that of which it is called
the genus, not in the sense in which we speak of the genus or family
of the Heraclidae, but in that in which the genus is an element in
a thing's nature), nor is it so with reference to things which are
not in the same genus, but it will differ in genus from them, and
in species from things in the same genus. For a thing's difference
from that from which it differs in species must be a contrariety;
and this belongs only to things in the same genus. 

Part 9 "

"One might raise the question, why woman does not differ from man
in species, when female and male are contrary and their difference
is a contrariety; and why a female and a male animal are not different
in species, though this difference belongs to animal in virtue of
its own nature, and not as paleness or darkness does; both 'female'
and 'male' belong to it qua animal. This question is almost the same
as the other, why one contrariety makes things different in species
and another does not, e.g. 'with feet' and 'with wings' do, but paleness
and darkness do not. Perhaps it is because the former are modifications
peculiar to the genus, and the latter are less so. And since one element
is definition and one is matter, contrarieties which are in the definition
make a difference in species, but those which are in the thing taken
as including its matter do not make one. And so paleness in a man,
or darkness, does not make one, nor is there a difference in species
between the pale man and the dark man, not even if each of them be
denoted by one word. For man is here being considered on his material
side, and matter does not create a difference; for it does not make
individual men species of man, though the flesh and the bones of which
this man and that man consist are other. The concrete thing is other,
but not other in species, because in the definition there is no contrariety.
This is the ultimate indivisible kind. Callias is definition + matter,
the pale man, then, is so also, because it is the individual Callias
that is pale; man, then, is pale only incidentally. Neither do a brazen
and a wooden circle, then, differ in species; and if a brazen triangle
and a wooden circle differ in species, it is not because of the matter,
but because there is a contrariety in the definition. But does the
matter not make things other in species, when it is other in a certain
way, or is there a sense in which it does? For why is this horse other
than this man in species, although their matter is included with their
definitions? Doubtless because there is a contrariety in the definition.
For while there is a contrariety also between pale man and dark horse,
and it is a contrariety in species, it does not depend on the paleness
of the one and the darkness of the other, since even if both had been
pale, yet they would have been other in species. But male and female,
while they are modifications peculiar to 'animal', are so not in virtue
of its essence but in the matter, ie. the body. This is why the same
seed becomes female or male by being acted on in a certain way. We
have stated, then, what it is to be other in species, and why some
things differ in species and others do not. 

Part 10 "

"Since contraries are other in form, and the perishable and the imperishable
are contraries (for privation is a determinate incapacity), the perishable
and the imperishable must be different in kind. 

"Now so far we have spoken of the general terms themselves, so that
it might be thought not to be necessary that every imperishable thing
should be different from every perishable thing in form, just as not
every pale thing is different in form from every dark thing. For the
same thing can be both, and even at the same time if it is a universal
(e.g. man can be both pale and dark), and if it is an individual it
can still be both; for the same man can be, though not at the same
time, pale and dark. Yet pale is contrary to dark. 

"But while some contraries belong to certain things by accident (e.g.
both those now mentioned and many others), others cannot, and among
these are 'perishable' and 'imperishable'. For nothing is by accident
perishable. For what is accidental is capable of not being present,
but perishableness is one of the attributes that belong of necessity
to the things to which they belong; or else one and the same thing
may be perishable and imperishable, if perishableness is capable of
not belonging to it. Perishableness then must either be the essence
or be present in the essence of each perishable thing. The same account
holds good for imperishableness also; for both are attributes which
are present of necessity. The characteristics, then, in respect of
which and in direct consequence of which one thing is perishable and
another imperishable, are opposite, so that the things must be different
in kind. 

"Evidently, then, there cannot be Forms such as some maintain, for
then one man would be perishable and another imperishable. Yet the
Forms are said to be the same in form with the individuals and not
merely to have the same name; but things which differ in kind are
farther apart than those which differ in form. 



BOOK XI

Part 1 

"

"THAT Wisdom is a science of first principles is evident from the
introductory chapters, in which we have raised objections to the statements
of others about the first principles; but one might ask the question
whether Wisdom is to be conceived as one science or as several. If
as one, it may be objected that one science always deals with contraries,
but the first principles are not contrary. If it is not one, what
sort of sciences are those with which it is to be identified?

"Further, is it the business of one science, or of more than one,
to examine the first principles of demonstration? If of one, why of
this rather than of any other? If of more, what sort of sciences must
these be said to be? 

"Further, does Wisdom investigate all substances or not? If not all,
it is hard to say which; but if, being one, it investigates them all,
it is doubtful how the same science can embrace several subject-matters.

"Further, does it deal with substances only or also with their attributes?
If in the case of attributes demonstration is possible, in that of
substances it is not. But if the two sciences are different, what
is each of them and which is Wisdom? If we think of it as demonstrative,
the science of the attributes is Wisdom, but if as dealing with what
is primary, the science of substances claims the tide. 

"But again the science we are looking for must not be supposed to
deal with the causes which have been mentioned in the Physics. For
(A) it does not deal with the final cause (for that is the nature
of the good, and this is found in the field of action and movement;
and it is the first mover-for that is the nature of the end-but in
the case of things unmovable there is nothing that moved them first),
and (B) in general it is hard to say whether perchance the science
we are now looking for deals with perceptible substances or not with
them, but with certain others. If with others, it must deal either
with the Forms or with the objects of mathematics. Now (a) evidently
the Forms do not exist. (But it is hard to say, even if one suppose
them to exist, why in the world the same is not true of the other
things of which there are Forms, as of the objects of mathematics.
I mean that these thinkers place the objects of mathematics between
the Forms and perceptible things, as a kind of third set of things
apart both from the Forms and from the things in this world; but there
is not a third man or horse besides the ideal and the individuals.
If on the other hand it is not as they say, with what sort of things
must the mathematician be supposed to deal? Certainly not with the
things in this world; for none of these is the sort of thing which
the mathematical sciences demand.) Nor (b) does the science which
we are now seeking treat of the objects of mathematics; for none of
them can exist separately. But again it does not deal with perceptible
substances; for they are perishable. 

"In general one might raise the question, to what kind of science
it belongs to discuss the difficulties about the matter of the objects
of mathematics. Neither to physics (because the whole inquiry of the
physicist is about the things that have in themselves a principle.
of movement and rest), nor yet to the science which inquires into
demonstration and science; for this is just the subject which it investigates.
It remains then that it is the philosophy which we have set before
ourselves that treats of those subjects. 

"One might discuss the question whether the science we are seeking
should be said to deal with the principles which are by some called
elements; all men suppose these to be present in composite things.
But it might be thought that the science we seek should treat rather
of universals; for every definition and every science is of universals
and not of infimae species, so that as far as this goes it would deal
with the highest genera. These would turn out to be being and unity;
for these might most of all be supposed to contain all things that
are, and to be most like principles because they are by nature; for
if they perish all other things are destroyed with them; for everything
is and is one. But inasmuch as, if one is to suppose them to be genera,
they must be predicable of their differentiae, and no genus is predicable
of any of its differentiae, in this way it would seem that we should
not make them genera nor principles. Further, if the simpler is more
of a principle than the less simple, and the ultimate members of the
genus are simpler than the genera (for they are indivisible, but the
genera are divided into many and differing species), the species might
seem to be the principles, rather than the genera. But inasmuch as
the species are involved in the destruction of the genera, the genera
are more like principles; for that which involves another in its destruction
is a principle of it. These and others of the kind are the subjects
that involve difficulties. 

Part 2 "

"Further, must we suppose something apart from individual things,
or is it these that the science we are seeking treats of? But these
are infinite in number. Yet the things that are apart from the individuals
are genera or species; but the science we now seek treats of neither
of these. The reason why this is impossible has been stated. Indeed,
it is in general hard to say whether one must assume that there is
a separable substance besides the sensible substances (i.e. the substances
in this world), or that these are the real things and Wisdom is concerned
with them. For we seem to seek another kind of substance, and this
is our problem, i.e. to see if there is something which can exist
apart by itself and belongs to no sensible thing.-Further, if there
is another substance apart from and corresponding to sensible substances,
which kinds of sensible substance must be supposed to have this corresponding
to them? Why should one suppose men or horses to have it, more than
either the other animals or even all lifeless things? On the other
hand to set up other and eternal substances equal in number to the
sensible and perishable substances would seem to fall beyond the bounds
of probability.-But if the principle we now seek is not separable
from corporeal things, what has a better claim to the name matter?
This, however, does not exist in actuality, but exists in potency.
And it would seem rather that the form or shape is a more important
principle than this; but the form is perishable, so that there is
no eternal substance at all which can exist apart and independent.
But this is paradoxical; for such a principle and substance seems
to exist and is sought by nearly all the most refined thinkers as
something that exists; for how is there to be order unless there is
something eternal and independent and permanent? 

"Further, if there is a substance or principle of such a nature as
that which we are now seeking, and if this is one for all things,
and the same for eternal and for perishable things, it is hard to
say why in the world, if there is the same principle, some of the
things that fall under the principle are eternal, and others are not
eternal; this is paradoxical. But if there is one principle of perishable
and another of eternal things, we shall be in a like difficulty if
the principle of perishable things, as well as that of eternal, is
eternal; for why, if the principle is eternal, are not the things
that fall under the principle also eternal? But if it is perishable
another principle is involved to account for it, and another to account
for that, and this will go on to infinity. 

"If on the other hand we are to set up what are thought to be the
most unchangeable principles, being and unity, firstly, if each of
these does not indicate a 'this' or substance, how will they be separable
and independent? Yet we expect the eternal and primary principles
to be so. But if each of them does signify a 'this' or substance,
all things that are are substances; for being is predicated of all
things (and unity also of some); but that all things that are are
substance is false. Further, how can they be right who say that the
first principle is unity and this is substance, and generate number
as the first product from unity and from matter, assert that number
is substance? How are we to think of 'two', and each of the other
numbers composed of units, as one? On this point neither do they say
anything nor is it easy to say anything. But if we are to suppose
lines or what comes after these (I mean the primary surfaces) to be
principles, these at least are not separable substances, but sections
and divisions-the former of surfaces, the latter of bodies (while
points are sections and divisions of lines); and further they are
limits of these same things; and all these are in other things and
none is separable. Further, how are we to suppose that there is a
substance of unity and the point? Every substance comes into being
by a gradual process, but a point does not; for the point is a division.

"A further difficulty is raised by the fact that all knowledge is
of universals and of the 'such', but substance is not a universal,
but is rather a 'this'-a separable thing, so that if there is knowledge
about the first principles, the question arises, how are we to suppose
the first principle to be substance? 

"Further, is there anything apart from the concrete thing (by which
I mean the matter and that which is joined with it), or not? If not,
we are met by the objection that all things that are in matter are
perishable. But if there is something, it must be the form or shape.
Now it is hard to determine in which cases this exists apart and in
which it does not; for in some cases the form is evidently not separable,
e.g. in the case of a house. 

"Further, are the principles the same in kind or in number? If they
are one in number, all things will be the same. 

Part 3 "

"Since the science of the philosopher treats of being qua being universally
and not in respect of a part of it, and 'being' has many senses and
is not used in one only, it follows that if the word is used equivocally
and in virtue of nothing common to its various uses, being does not
fall under one science (for the meanings of an equivocal term do not
form one genus); but if the word is used in virtue of something common,
being will fall under one science. The term seems to be used in the
way we have mentioned, like 'medical' and 'healthy'. For each of these
also we use in many senses. Terms are used in this way by virtue of
some kind of reference, in the one case to medical science, in the
other to health, in others to something else, but in each case to
one identical concept. For a discussion and a knife are called medical
because the former proceeds from medical science, and the latter is
useful to it. And a thing is called healthy in a similar way; one
thing because it is indicative of health, another because it is productive
of it. And the same is true in the other cases. Everything that is,
then, is said to 'be' in this same way; each thing that is is said
to 'be' because it is a modification of being qua being or a permanent
or a transient state or a movement of it, or something else of the
sort. And since everything that is may be referred to something single
and common, each of the contrarieties also may be referred to the
first differences and contrarieties of being, whether the first differences
of being are plurality and unity, or likeness and unlikeness, or some
other differences; let these be taken as already discussed. It makes
no difference whether that which is be referred to being or to unity.
For even if they are not the same but different, at least they are
convertible; for that which is one is also somehow being, and that
which is being is one. 

"But since every pair of contraries falls to be examined by one and
the same science, and in each pair one term is the privative of the
other though one might regarding some contraries raise the question,
how they can be privately related, viz. those which have an intermediate,
e.g. unjust and just-in all such cases one must maintain that the
privation is not of the whole definition, but of the infima species.
if the just man is 'by virtue of some permanent disposition obedient
to the laws', the unjust man will not in every case have the whole
definition denied of him, but may be merely 'in some respect deficient
in obedience to the laws', and in this respect the privation will
attach to him; and similarly in all other cases. 

"As the mathematician investigates abstractions (for before beginning
his investigation he strips off all the sensible qualities, e.g. weight
and lightness, hardness and its contrary, and also heat and cold and
the other sensible contrarieties, and leaves only the quantitative
and continuous, sometimes in one, sometimes in two, sometimes in three
dimensions, and the attributes of these qua quantitative and continuous,
and does not consider them in any other respect, and examines the
relative positions of some and the attributes of these, and the commensurabilities
and incommensurabilities of others, and the ratios of others; but
yet we posit one and the same science of all these things--geometry)--the
same is true with regard to being. For the attributes of this in so
far as it is being, and the contrarieties in it qua being, it is the
business of no other science than philosophy to investigate; for to
physics one would assign the study of things not qua being, but rather
qua sharing in movement; while dialectic and sophistic deal with the
attributes of things that are, but not of things qua being, and not
with being itself in so far as it is being; therefore it remains that
it is the philosopher who studies the things we have named, in so
far as they are being. Since all that is is to 'be' in virtue of something
single and common, though the term has many meanings, and contraries
are in the same case (for they are referred to the first contrarieties
and differences of being), and things of this sort can fall under
one science, the difficulty we stated at the beginning appears to
be solved,-I mean the question how there can be a single science of
things which are many and different in genus. 

Part 4 "

"Since even the mathematician uses the common axioms only in a special
application, it must be the business of first philosophy to examine
the principles of mathematics also. That when equals are taken from
equals the remainders are equal, is common to all quantities, but
mathematics studies a part of its proper matter which it has detached,
e.g. lines or angles or numbers or some other kind of quantity-not,
however, qua being but in so far as each of them is continuous in
one or two or three dimensions; but philosophy does not inquire about
particular subjects in so far as each of them has some attribute or
other, but speculates about being, in so far as each particular thing
is.-Physics is in the same position as mathematics; for physics studies
the attributes and the principles of the things that are, qua moving
and not qua being (whereas the primary science, we have said, deals
with these, only in so far as the underlying subjects are existent,
and not in virtue of any other character); and so both physics and
mathematics must be classed as parts of Wisdom. 

Part 5 "

"There is a principle in things, about which we cannot be deceived,
but must always, on the contrary recognize the truth,-viz. that the
same thing cannot at one and the same time be and not be, or admit
any other similar pair of opposites. About such matters there is no
proof in the full sense, though there is proof ad hominem. For it
is not possible to infer this truth itself from a more certain principle,
yet this is necessary if there is to be completed proof of it in the
full sense. But he who wants to prove to the asserter of opposites
that he is wrong must get from him an admission which shall be identical
with the principle that the same thing cannot be and not be at one
and the same time, but shall not seem to be identical; for thus alone
can his thesis be demonstrated to the man who asserts that opposite
statements can be truly made about the same subject. Those, then,
who are to join in argument with one another must to some extent understand
one another; for if this does not happen how are they to join in argument
with one another? Therefore every word must be intelligible and indicate
something, and not many things but only one; and if it signifies more
than one thing, it must be made plain to which of these the word is
being applied. He, then, who says 'this is and is not' denies what
he affirms, so that what the word signifies, he says it does not signify;
and this is impossible. Therefore if 'this is' signifies something,
one cannot truly assert its contradictory. 

"Further, if the word signifies something and this is asserted truly,
this connexion must be necessary; and it is not possible that that
which necessarily is should ever not be; it is not possible therefore
to make the opposed affirmations and negations truly of the same subject.
Further, if the affirmation is no more true than the negation, he
who says 'man' will be no more right than he who says 'not-man'. It
would seem also that in saying the man is not a horse one would be
either more or not less right than in saying he is not a man, so that
one will also be right in saying that the same person is a horse;
for it was assumed to be possible to make opposite statements equally
truly. It follows then that the same person is a man and a horse,
or any other animal. 

"While, then, there is no proof of these things in the full sense,
there is a proof which may suffice against one who will make these
suppositions. And perhaps if one had questioned Heraclitus himself
in this way one might have forced him to confess that opposite statements
can never be true of the same subjects. But, as it is, he adopted
this opinion without understanding what his statement involves. But
in any case if what is said by him is true, not even this itself will
be true-viz. that the same thing can at one and the same time both
be and not be. For as, when the statements are separated, the affirmation
is no more true than the negation, in the same way-the combined and
complex statement being like a single affirmation-the whole taken
as an affirmation will be no more true than the negation. Further,
if it is not possible to affirm anything truly, this itself will be
false-the assertion that there is no true affirmation. But if a true
affirmation exists, this appears to refute what is said by those who
raise such objections and utterly destroy rational discourse.

Part 6 "

"The saying of Protagoras is like the views we have mentioned; he
said that man is the measure of all things, meaning simply that that
which seems to each man also assuredly is. If this is so, it follows
that the same thing both is and is not, and is bad and good, and that
the contents of all other opposite statements are true, because often
a particular thing appears beautiful to some and the contrary of beautiful
to others, and that which appears to each man is the measure. This
difficulty may be solved by considering the source of this opinion.
It seems to have arisen in some cases from the doctrine of the natural
philosophers, and in others from the fact that all men have not the
same views about the same things, but a particular thing appears pleasant
to some and the contrary of pleasant to others. 

"That nothing comes to be out of that which is not, but everything
out of that which is, is a dogma common to nearly all the natural
philosophers. Since, then, white cannot come to be if the perfectly
white and in no respect not-white existed before, that which becomes
white must come from that which is not white; so that it must come
to be out of that which is not (so they argue), unless the same thing
was at the beginning white and not-white. But it is not hard to solve
this difficulty; for we have said in our works on physics in what
sense things that come to be come to be from that which is not, and
in what sense from that which is. 

"But to attend equally to the opinions and the fancies of disputing
parties is childish; for clearly one of them must be mistaken. And
this is evident from what happens in respect of sensation; for the
same thing never appears sweet to some and the contrary of sweet to
others, unless in the one case the sense-organ which discriminates
the aforesaid flavours has been perverted and injured. And if this
is so the one party must be taken to be the measure, and the other
must not. And say the same of good and bad, and beautiful and ugly,
and all other such qualities. For to maintain the view we are opposing
is just like maintaining that the things that appear to people who
put their finger under their eye and make the object appear two instead
of one must be two (because they appear to be of that number) and
again one (for to those who do not interfere with their eye the one
object appears one). 

"In general, it is absurd to make the fact that the things of this
earth are observed to change and never to remain in the same state,
the basis of our judgement about the truth. For in pursuing the truth
one must start from the things that are always in the same state and
suffer no change. Such are the heavenly bodies; for these do not appear
to be now of one nature and again of another, but are manifestly always
the same and share in no change. 

"Further, if there is movement, there is also something moved, and
everything is moved out of something and into something; it follows
that that that which is moved must first be in that out of which it
is to be moved, and then not be in it, and move into the other and
come to be in it, and that the contradictory statements are not true
at the same time, as these thinkers assert they are. 

"And if the things of this earth continuously flow and move in respect
of quantity-if one were to suppose this, although it is not true-why
should they not endure in respect of quality? For the assertion of
contradictory statements about the same thing seems to have arisen
largely from the belief that the quantity of bodies does not endure,
which, our opponents hold, justifies them in saying that the same
thing both is and is not four cubits long. But essence depends on
quality, and this is of determinate nature, though quantity is of
indeterminate. 

"Further, when the doctor orders people to take some particular food,
why do they take it? In what respect is 'this is bread' truer than
'this is not bread'? And so it would make no difference whether one
ate or not. But as a matter of fact they take the food which is ordered,
assuming that they know the truth about it and that it is bread. Yet
they should not, if there were no fixed constant nature in sensible
things, but all natures moved and flowed for ever. 

"Again, if we are always changing and never remain the same, what
wonder is it if to us, as to the sick, things never appear the same?
(For to them also, because they are not in the same condition as when
they were well, sensible qualities do not appear alike; yet, for all
that, the sensible things themselves need not share in any change,
though they produce different, and not identical, sensations in the
sick. And the same must surely happen to the healthy if the afore-said
change takes place.) But if we do not change but remain the same,
there will be something that endures. 

"As for those to whom the difficulties mentioned are suggested by
reasoning, it is not easy to solve the difficulties to their satisfaction,
unless they will posit something and no longer demand a reason for
it; for it is only thus that all reasoning and all proof is accomplished;
if they posit nothing, they destroy discussion and all reasoning.
Therefore with such men there is no reasoning. But as for those who
are perplexed by the traditional difficulties, it is easy to meet
them and to dissipate the causes of their perplexity. This is evident
from what has been said. 

"It is manifest, therefore, from these arguments that contradictory
statements cannot be truly made about the same subject at one time,
nor can contrary statements, because every contrariety depends on
privation. This is evident if we reduce the definitions of contraries
to their principle. 

"Similarly, no intermediate between contraries can be predicated of
one and the same subject, of which one of the contraries is predicated.
If the subject is white we shall be wrong in saying it is neither
black nor white, for then it follows that it is and is not white;
for the second of the two terms we have put together is true of it,
and this is the contradictory of white. 

"We could not be right, then, in accepting the views either of Heraclitus
or of Anaxagoras. If we were, it would follow that contraries would
be predicated of the same subject; for when Anaxagoras says that in
everything there is a part of everything, he says nothing is sweet
any more than it is bitter, and so with any other pair of contraries,
since in everything everything is present not potentially only, but
actually and separately. And similarly all statements cannot be false
nor all true, both because of many other difficulties which might
be adduced as arising from this position, and because if all are false
it will not be true to say even this, and if all are true it will
not be false to say all are false. 

Part 7 "

"Every science seeks certain principles and causes for each of its
objects-e.g. medicine and gymnastics and each of the other sciences,
whether productive or mathematical. For each of these marks off a
certain class of things for itself and busies itself about this as
about something existing and real,-not however qua real; the science
that does this is another distinct from these. Of the sciences mentioned
each gets somehow the 'what' in some class of things and tries to
prove the other truths, with more or less precision. Some get the
'what' through perception, others by hypothesis; so that it is clear
from an induction of this sort that there is no demonstration. of
the substance or 'what'. 

"There is a science of nature, and evidently it must be different
both from practical and from productive science. For in the case of
productive science the principle of movement is in the producer and
not in the product, and is either an art or some other faculty. And
similarly in practical science the movement is not in the thing done,
but rather in the doers. But the science of the natural philosopher
deals with the things that have in themselves a principle of movement.
It is clear from these facts, then, that natural science must be neither
practical nor productive, but theoretical (for it must fall into some
one of these classes). And since each of the sciences must somehow
know the 'what' and use this as a principle, we must not fall to observe
how the natural philosopher should define things and how he should
state the definition of the essence-whether as akin to 'snub' or rather
to 'concave'. For of these the definition of 'snub' includes the matter
of the thing, but that of 'concave' is independent of the matter;
for snubness is found in a nose, so that we look for its definition
without eliminating the nose, for what is snub is a concave nose.
Evidently then the definition of flesh also and of the eye and of
the other parts must always be stated without eliminating the matter.

"Since there is a science of being qua being and capable of existing
apart, we must consider whether this is to be regarded as the same
as physics or rather as different. Physics deals with the things that
have a principle of movement in themselves; mathematics is theoretical,
and is a science that deals with things that are at rest, but its
subjects cannot exist apart. Therefore about that which can exist
apart and is unmovable there is a science different from both of these,
if there is a substance of this nature (I mean separable and unmovable),
as we shall try to prove there is. And if there is such a kind of
thing in the world, here must surely be the divine, and this must
be the first and most dominant principle. Evidently, then, there are
three kinds of theoretical sciences-physics, mathematics, theology.
The class of theoretical sciences is the best, and of these themselves
the last named is best; for it deals with the highest of existing
things, and each science is called better or worse in virtue of its
proper object. 

"One might raise the question whether the science of being qua being
is to be regarded as universal or not. Each of the mathematical sciences
deals with some one determinate class of things, but universal mathematics
applies alike to all. Now if natural substances are the first of existing
things, physics must be the first of sciences; but if there is another
entity and substance, separable and unmovable, the knowledge of it
must be different and prior to physics and universal because it is
prior. 

Part 8 "

"Since 'being' in general has several senses, of which one is 'being
by accident', we must consider first that which 'is' in this sense.
Evidently none of the traditional sciences busies itself about the
accidental. For neither does architecture consider what will happen
to those who are to use the house (e.g. whether they have a painful
life in it or not), nor does weaving, or shoemaking, or the confectioner's
art, do the like; but each of these sciences considers only what is
peculiar to it, i.e. its proper end. And as for the argument that
'when he who is musical becomes lettered he'll be both at once, not
having been both before; and that which is, not always having been,
must have come to be; therefore he must have at once become musical
and lettered',-this none of the recognized sciences considers, but
only sophistic; for this alone busies itself about the accidental,
so that Plato is not far wrong when he says that the sophist spends
his time on non-being. 

"That a science of the accidental is not even possible will be evident
if we try to see what the accidental really is. We say that everything
either is always and of necessity (necessity not in the sense of violence,
but that which we appeal to in demonstrations), or is for the most
part, or is neither for the most part, nor always and of necessity,
but merely as it chances; e.g. there might be cold in the dogdays,
but this occurs neither always and of necessity, nor for the most
part, though it might happen sometimes. The accidental, then, is what
occurs, but not always nor of necessity, nor for the most part. Now
we have said what the accidental is, and it is obvious why there is
no science of such a thing; for all science is of that which is always
or for the most part, but the accidental is in neither of these classes.

"Evidently there are not causes and principles of the accidental,
of the same kind as there are of the essential; for if there were,
everything would be of necessity. If A is when B is, and B is when
C is, and if C exists not by chance but of necessity, that also of
which C was cause will exist of necessity, down to the last causatum
as it is called (but this was supposed to be accidental). Therefore
all things will be of necessity, and chance and the possibility of
a thing's either occurring or not occurring are removed entirely from
the range of events. And if the cause be supposed not to exist but
to be coming to be, the same results will follow; everything will
occur of necessity. For to-morrow's eclipse will occur if A occurs,
and A if B occurs, and B if C occurs; and in this way if we subtract
time from the limited time between now and to-morrow we shall come
sometime to the already existing condition. Therefore since this exists,
everything after this will occur of necessity, so that all things
occur of necessity. 

"As to that which 'is' in the sense of being true or of being by accident,
the former depends on a combination in thought and is an affection
of thought (which is the reason why it is the principles, not of that
which 'is' in this sense, but of that which is outside and can exist
apart, that are sought); and the latter is not necessary but indeterminate
(I mean the accidental); and of such a thing the causes are unordered
and indefinite. 

"Adaptation to an end is found in events that happen by nature or
as the result of thought. It is 'luck' when one of these events happens
by accident. For as a thing may exist, so it may be a cause, either
by its own nature or by accident. Luck is an accidental cause at work
in such events adapted to an end as are usually effected in accordance
with purpose. And so luck and thought are concerned with the same
sphere; for purpose cannot exist without thought. The causes from
which lucky results might happen are indeterminate; and so luck is
obscure to human calculation and is a cause by accident, but in the
unqualified sense a cause of nothing. It is good or bad luck when
the result is good or evil; and prosperity or misfortune when the
scale of the results is large. 

"Since nothing accidental is prior to the essential, neither are accidental
causes prior. If, then, luck or spontaneity is a cause of the material
universe, reason and nature are causes before it. 

Part 9 "

"Some things are only actually, some potentially, some potentially
and actually, what they are, viz. in one case a particular reality,
in another, characterized by a particular quantity, or the like. There
is no movement apart from things; for change is always according to
the categories of being, and there is nothing common to these and
in no one category. But each of the categories belongs to all its
subjects in either of two ways (e.g. 'this-ness'-for one kind of it
is 'positive form', and the other is 'privation'; and as regards quality
one kind is 'white' and the other 'black', and as regards quantity
one kind is 'complete' and the other 'incomplete', and as regards
spatial movement one is 'upwards' and the other 'downwards', or one
thing is 'light' and another 'heavy'); so that there are as many kinds
of movement and change as of being. There being a distinction in each
class of things between the potential and the completely real, I call
the actuality of the potential as such, movement. That what we say
is true, is plain from the following facts. When the 'buildable',
in so far as it is what we mean by 'buildable', exists actually, it
is being built, and this is the process of building. Similarly with
learning, healing, walking, leaping, ageing, ripening. Movement takes
when the complete reality itself exists, and neither earlier nor later.
The complete reality, then, of that which exists potentially, when
it is completely real and actual, not qua itself, but qua movable,
is movement. By qua I mean this: bronze is potentially a statue; but
yet it is not the complete reality of bronze qua bronze that is movement.
For it is not the same thing to be bronze and to be a certain potency.
If it were absolutely the same in its definition, the complete reality
of bronze would have been a movement. But it is not the same. (This
is evident in the case of contraries; for to be capable of being well
and to be capable of being ill are not the same-for if they were,
being well and being ill would have been the same-it is that which
underlies and is healthy or diseased, whether it is moisture or blood,
that is one and the same.) And since it is not. the same, as colour
and the visible are not the same, it is the complete reality of the
potential, and as potential, that is movement. That it is this, and
that movement takes place when the complete reality itself exists,
and neither earlier nor later, is evident. For each thing is capable
of being sometimes actual, sometimes not, e.g. the buildable qua buildable;
and the actuality of the buildable qua buildable is building. For
the actuality is either this-the act of building-or the house. But
when the house exists, it is no longer buildable; the buildable is
what is being built. The actuality, then, must be the act of building,
and this is a movement. And the same account applies to all other
movements. 

"That what we have said is right is evident from what all others say
about movement, and from the fact that it is not easy to define it
otherwise. For firstly one cannot put it in any class. This is evident
from what people say. Some call it otherness and inequality and the
unreal; none of these, however, is necessarily moved, and further,
change is not either to these or from these any more than from their
opposites. The reason why people put movement in these classes is
that it is thought to be something indefinite, and the principles
in one of the two 'columns of contraries' are indefinite because they
are privative, for none of them is either a 'this' or a 'such' or
in any of the other categories. And the reason why movement is thought
to be indefinite is that it cannot be classed either with the potency
of things or with their actuality; for neither that which is capable
of being of a certain quantity, nor that which is actually of a certain
quantity, is of necessity moved, and movement is thought to be an
actuality, but incomplete; the reason is that the potential, whose
actuality it is, is incomplete. And therefore it is hard to grasp
what movement is; for it must be classed either under privation or
under potency or under absolute actuality, but evidently none of these
is possible. Therefore what remains is that it must be what we said-both
actuality and the actuality we have described-which is hard to detect
but capable of existing. 

"And evidently movement is in the movable; for it is the complete
realization of this by that which is capable of causing movement.
And the actuality of that which is capable of causing movement is
no other than that of the movable. For it must be the complete reality
of both. For while a thing is capable of causing movement because
it can do this, it is a mover because it is active; but it is on the
movable that it is capable of acting, so that the actuality of both
is one, just as there is the same interval from one to two as from
two to one, and as the steep ascent and the steep descent are one,
but the being of them is not one; the case of the mover and the moved
is similar. 

Part 10 "

"The infinite is either that which is incapable of being traversed
because it is not its nature to be traversed (this corresponds to
the sense in which the voice is 'invisible'), or that which admits
only of incomplete traverse or scarcely admits of traverse, or that
which, though it naturally admits of traverse, is not traversed or
limited; further, a thing may be infinite in respect of addition or
of subtraction, or both. The infinite cannot be a separate, independent
thing. For if it is neither a spatial magnitude nor a plurality, but
infinity itself is its substance and not an accident of it, it will
be indivisible; for the divisible is either magnitude or plurality.
But if indivisible, it is not infinite, except as the voice is invisible;
but people do not mean this, nor are we examining this sort of infinite,
but the infinite as untraversable. Further, how can an infinite exist
by itself, unless number and magnitude also exist by themselvess-since
infinity is an attribute of these? Further, if the infinite is an
accident of something else, it cannot be qua infinite an element in
things, as the invisible is not an element in speech, though the voice
is invisible. And evidently the infinite cannot exist actually. For
then any part of it that might be taken would be infinite (for 'to
be infinite' and 'the infinite' are the same, if the infinite is substance
and not predicated of a subject). Therefore it is either indivisible,
or if it is partible, it is divisible into infinites; but the same
thing cannot be many infinites (as a part of air is air, so a part
of the infinite would be infinite, if the infinite is substance and
a principle). Therefore it must be impartible and indivisible. But
the actually infinite cannot be indivisible; for it must be of a certain
quantity. Therefore infinity belongs to its subject incidentally.
But if so, then (as we have said) it cannot be it that is a principle,
but that of which it is an accident-the air or the even number.

"This inquiry is universal; but that the infinite is not among sensible
things, is evident from the following argument. If the definition
of a body is 'that which is bounded by planes', there cannot be an
infinite body either sensible or intelligible; nor a separate and
infinite number, for number or that which has a number is numerable.
Concretely, the truth is evident from the following argument. The
infinite can neither be composite nor simple. For (a) it cannot be
a composite body, since the elements are limited in multitude. For
the contraries must be equal and no one of them must be infinite;
for if one of the two bodies falls at all short of the other in potency,
the finite will be destroyed by the infinite. And that each should
be infinite is impossible. For body is that which has extension in
all directions, and the infinite is the boundlessly extended, so that
if the infinite is a body it will be infinite in every direction.
Nor (b) can the infinite body be one and simple-neither, as some say,
something apart from the elements, from which they generate these
(for there is no such body apart from the elements; for everything
can be resolved into that of which it consists, but no such product
of analysis is observed except the simple bodies), nor fire nor any
other of the elements. For apart from the question how any of them
could be infinite, the All, even if it is finite, cannot either be
or become any one of them, as Heraclitus says all things sometime
become fire. The same argument applies to this as to the One which
the natural philosophers posit besides the elements. For everything
changes from contrary to contrary, e.g. from hot to cold.

"Further, a sensible body is somewhere, and whole and part have the
same proper place, e.g. the whole earth and part of the earth. Therefore
if (a) the infinite body is homogeneous, it will be unmovable or it
will be always moving. But this is impossible; for why should it rather
rest, or move, down, up, or anywhere, rather than anywhere else? E.g.
if there were a clod which were part of an infinite body, where will
this move or rest? The proper place of the body which is homogeneous
with it is infinite. Will the clod occupy the whole place, then? And
how? (This is impossible.) What then is its rest or its movement?
It will either rest everywhere, and then it cannot move; or it will
move everywhere, and then it cannot be still. But (b) if the All has
unlike parts, the proper places of the parts are unlike also, and,
firstly, the body of the All is not one except by contact, and, secondly,
the parts will be either finite or infinite in variety of kind. Finite
they cannot be; for then those of one kind will be infinite in quantity
and those of another will not (if the All is infinite), e.g. fire
or water would be infinite, but such an infinite element would be
destruction to the contrary elements. But if the parts are infinite
and simple, their places also are infinite and there will be an infinite
number of elements; and if this is impossible, and the places are
finite, the All also must be limited. 

"In general, there cannot be an infinite body and also a proper place
for bodies, if every sensible body has either weight or lightness.
For it must move either towards the middle or upwards, and the infinite
either the whole or the half of it-cannot do either; for how will
you divide it? Or how will part of the infinite be down and part up,
or part extreme and part middle? Further, every sensible body is in
a place, and there are six kinds of place, but these cannot exist
in an infinite body. In general, if there cannot be an infinite place,
there cannot be an infinite body; (and there cannot be an infinite
place,) for that which is in a place is somewhere, and this means
either up or down or in one of the other directions, and each of these
is a limit. 

"The infinite is not the same in the sense that it is a single thing
whether exhibited in distance or in movement or in time, but the posterior
among these is called infinite in virtue of its relation to the prior;
i.e. a movement is called infinite in virtue of the distance covered
by the spatial movement or alteration or growth, and a time is called
infinite because of the movement which occupies it. 

Part 11 "

"Of things which change, some change in an accidental sense, like
that in which 'the musical' may be said to walk, and others are said,
without qualification, to change, because something in them changes,
i.e. the things that change in parts; the body becomes healthy, because
the eye does. But there is something which is by its own nature moved
directly, and this is the essentially movable. The same distinction
is found in the case of the mover; for it causes movement either in
an accidental sense or in respect of a part of itself or essentially.
There is something that directly causes movement; and there is something
that is moved, also the time in which it is moved, and that from which
and that into which it is moved. But the forms and the affections
and the place, which are the terminals of the movement of moving things,
are unmovable, e.g. knowledge or heat; it is not heat that is a movement,
but heating. Change which is not accidental is found not in all things,
but between contraries, and their intermediates, and between contradictories.
We may convince ourselves of this by induction. 

"That which changes changes either from positive into positive, or
from negative into negative, or from positive into negative, or from
negative into positive. (By positive I mean that which is expressed
by an affirmative term.) Therefore there must be three changes; that
from negative into negative is not change, because (since the terms
are neither contraries nor contradictories) there is no opposition.
The change from the negative into the positive which is its contradictory
is generation-absolute change absolute generation, and partial change
partial generation; and the change from positive to negative is destruction-absolute
change absolute destruction, and partial change partial destruction.
If, then, 'that which is not' has several senses, and movement can
attach neither to that which implies putting together or separating,
nor to that which implies potency and is opposed to that which is
in the full sense (true, the not-white or not-good can be moved incidentally,
for the not-white might be a man; but that which is not a particular
thing at all can in no wise be moved), that which is not cannot be
moved (and if this is so, generation cannot be movement; for that
which is not is generated; for even if we admit to the full that its
generation is accidental, yet it is true to say that 'not-being' is
predicable of that which is generated absolutely). Similarly rest
cannot be long to that which is not. These consequences, then, turn
out to be awkward, and also this, that everything that is moved is
in a place, but that which is not is not in a place; for then it would
be somewhere. Nor is destruction movement; for the contrary of movement
is rest, but the contrary of destruction is generation. Since every
movement is a change, and the kinds of change are the three named
above, and of these those in the way of generation and destruction
are not movements, and these are the changes from a thing to its contradictory,
it follows that only the change from positive into positive is movement.
And the positives are either contrary or intermediate (for even privation
must be regarded as contrary), and are expressed by an affirmative
term, e.g. 'naked' or 'toothless' or 'black'. 

Part 12 "

"If the categories are classified as substance, quality, place, acting
or being acted on, relation, quantity, there must be three kinds of
movement-of quality, of quantity, of place. There is no movement in
respect of substance (because there is nothing contrary to substance),
nor of relation (for it is possible that if one of two things in relation
changes, the relative term which was true of the other thing ceases
to be true, though this other does not change at all,-so that their
movement is accidental), nor of agent and patient, or mover and moved,
because there is no movement of movement nor generation of generation,
nor, in general, change of change. For there might be movement of
movement in two senses; (1) movement might be the subject moved, as
a man is moved because he changes from pale to dark,-so that on this
showing movement, too, may be either heated or cooled or change its
place or increase. But this is impossible; for change is not a subject.
Or (2) some other subject might change from change into some other
form of existence (e.g. a man from disease into health). But this
also is not possible except incidentally. For every movement is change
from something into something. (And so are generation and destruction;
only, these are changes into things opposed in certain ways while
the other, movement, is into things opposed in another way.) A thing
changes, then, at the same time from health into illness, and from
this change itself into another. Clearly, then, if it has become ill,
it will have changed into whatever may be the other change concerned
(though it may be at rest), and, further, into a determinate change
each time; and that new change will be from something definite into
some other definite thing; therefore it will be the opposite change,
that of growing well. We answer that this happens only incidentally;
e.g. there is a change from the process of recollection to that of
forgetting, only because that to which the process attaches is changing,
now into a state of knowledge, now into one of ignorance.

"Further, the process will go on to infinity, if there is to be change
of change and coming to be of coming to be. What is true of the later,
then, must be true of the earlier; e.g. if the simple coming to be
was once coming to be, that which comes to be something was also once
coming to be; therefore that which simply comes to be something was
not yet in existence, but something which was coming to be coming
to be something was already in existence. And this was once coming
to be, so that at that time it was not yet coming to be something
else. Now since of an infinite number of terms there is not a first,
the first in this series will not exist, and therefore no following
term exist. Nothing, then, can either come term wi to be or move or
change. Further, that which is capable of a movement is also capable
of the contrary movement and rest, and that which comes to be also
ceases to be. Therefore that which is coming to be is ceasing to be
when it has come to be coming to be; for it cannot cease to be as
soon as it is coming to be coming to be, nor after it has come to
be; for that which is ceasing to be must be. Further, there must be
a matter underlying that which comes to be and changes. What will
this be, then,-what is it that becomes movement or becoming, as body
or soul is that which suffers alteration? And; again, what is it that
they move into? For it must be the movement or becoming of something
from something into something. How, then, can this condition be fulfilled?
There can be no learning of learning, and therefore no becoming of
becoming. Since there is not movement either of substance or of relation
or of activity and passivity, it remains that movement is in respect
of quality and quantity and place; for each of these admits of contrariety.
By quality I mean not that which is in the substance (for even the
differentia is a quality), but the passive quality, in virtue of which
a thing is said to be acted on or to be incapable of being acted on.
The immobile is either that which is wholly incapable of being moved,
or that which is moved with difficulty in a long time or begins slowly,
or that which is of a nature to be moved and can be moved but is not
moved when and where and as it would naturally be moved. This alone
among immobiles I describe as being at rest; for rest is contrary
to movement, so that it must be a privation in that which is receptive
of movement. 

"Things which are in one proximate place are together in place, and
things which are in different places are apart: things whose extremes
are together touch: that at which a changing thing, if it changes
continuously according to its nature, naturally arrives before it
arrives at the extreme into which it is changing, is between. That
which is most distant in a straight line is contrary in place. That
is successive which is after the beginning (the order being determined
by position or form or in some other way) and has nothing of the same
class between it and that which it succeeds, e.g. lines in the case
of a line, units in that of a unit, or a house in that of a house.
(There is nothing to prevent a thing of some other class from being
between.) For the successive succeeds something and is something later;
'one' does not succeed 'two', nor the first day of the month the second.
That which, being successive, touches, is contiguous. (Since all change
is between opposites, and these are either contraries or contradictories,
and there is no middle term for contradictories, clearly that which
is between is between contraries.) The continuous is a species of
the contiguous. I call two things continuous when the limits of each,
with which they touch and by which they are kept together, become
one and the same, so that plainly the continuous is found in the things
out of which a unity naturally arises in virtue of their contact.
And plainly the successive is the first of these concepts (for the
successive does not necessarily touch, but that which touches is successive;
and if a thing is continuous, it touches, but if it touches, it is
not necessarily continuous; and in things in which there is no touching,
there is no organic unity); therefore a point is not the same as a
unit; for contact belongs to points, but not to units, which have
only succession; and there is something between two of the former,
but not between two of the latter. 



BOOK XII

Part 1 

"

"The subject of our inquiry is substance; for the principles and the
causes we are seeking are those of substances. For if the universe
is of the nature of a whole, substance is its first part; and if it
coheres merely by virtue of serial succession, on this view also substance
is first, and is succeeded by quality, and then by quantity. At the
same time these latter are not even being in the full sense, but are
qualities and movements of it,-or else even the not-white and the
not-straight would be being; at least we say even these are, e.g.
'there is a not-white'. Further, none of the categories other than
substance can exist apart. And the early philosophers also in practice
testify to the primacy of substance; for it was of substance that
they sought the principles and elements and causes. The thinkers of
the present day tend to rank universals as substances (for genera
are universals, and these they tend to describe as principles and
substances, owing to the abstract nature of their inquiry); but the
thinkers of old ranked particular things as substances, e.g. fire
and earth, not what is common to both, body. 

"There are three kinds of substance-one that is sensible (of which
one subdivision is eternal and another is perishable; the latter is
recognized by all men, and includes e.g. plants and animals), of which
we must grasp the elements, whether one or many; and another that
is immovable, and this certain thinkers assert to be capable of existing
apart, some dividing it into two, others identifying the Forms and
the objects of mathematics, and others positing, of these two, only
the objects of mathematics. The former two kinds of substance are
the subject of physics (for they imply movement); but the third kind
belongs to another science, if there is no principle common to it
and to the other kinds. 

Part 2 "

"Sensible substance is changeable. Now if change proceeds from opposites
or from intermediates, and not from all opposites (for the voice is
not-white, (but it does not therefore change to white)), but from
the contrary, there must be something underlying which changes into
the contrary state; for the contraries do not change. Further, something
persists, but the contrary does not persist; there is, then, some
third thing besides the contraries, viz. the matter. Now since changes
are of four kinds-either in respect of the 'what' or of the quality
or of the quantity or of the place, and change in respect of 'thisness'
is simple generation and destruction, and change in quantity is increase
and diminution, and change in respect of an affection is alteration,
and change of place is motion, changes will be from given states into
those contrary to them in these several respects. The matter, then,
which changes must be capable of both states. And since that which
'is' has two senses, we must say that everything changes from that
which is potentially to that which is actually, e.g. from potentially
white to actually white, and similarly in the case of increase and
diminution. Therefore not only can a thing come to be, incidentally,
out of that which is not, but also all things come to be out of that
which is, but is potentially, and is not actually. And this is the
'One' of Anaxagoras; for instead of 'all things were together'-and
the 'Mixture' of Empedocles and Anaximander and the account given
by Democritus-it is better to say 'all things were together potentially
but not actually'. Therefore these thinkers seem to have had some
notion of matter. Now all things that change have matter, but different
matter; and of eternal things those which are not generable but are
movable in space have matter-not matter for generation, however, but
for motion from one place to another. 

"One might raise the question from what sort of non-being generation
proceeds; for 'non-being' has three senses. If, then, one form of
non-being exists potentially, still it is not by virtue of a potentiality
for any and every thing, but different things come from different
things; nor is it satisfactory to say that 'all things were together';
for they differ in their matter, since otherwise why did an infinity
of things come to be, and not one thing? For 'reason' is one, so that
if matter also were one, that must have come to be in actuality which
the matter was in potency. The causes and the principles, then, are
three, two being the pair of contraries of which one is definition
and form and the other is privation, and the third being the matter.

Part 3 "

"Note, next, that neither the matter nor the form comes to be-and
I mean the last matter and form. For everything that changes is something
and is changed by something and into something. That by which it is
changed is the immediate mover; that which is changed, the matter;
that into which it is changed, the form. The process, then, will go
on to infinity, if not only the bronze comes to be round but also
the round or the bronze comes to be; therefore there must be a stop.

"Note, next, that each substance comes into being out of something
that shares its name. (Natural objects and other things both rank
as substances.) For things come into being either by art or by nature
or by luck or by spontaneity. Now art is a principle of movement in
something other than the thing moved, nature is a principle in the
thing itself (for man begets man), and the other causes are privations
of these two. 

"There are three kinds of substance-the matter, which is a 'this'
in appearance (for all things that are characterized by contact and
not, by organic unity are matter and substratum, e.g. fire, flesh,
head; for these are all matter, and the last matter is the matter
of that which is in the full sense substance); the nature, which is
a 'this' or positive state towards which movement takes place; and
again, thirdly, the particular substance which is composed of these
two, e.g. Socrates or Callias. Now in some cases the 'this' does not
exist apart from the composite substance, e.g. the form of house does
not so exist, unless the art of building exists apart (nor is there
generation and destruction of these forms, but it is in another way
that the house apart from its matter, and health, and all ideals of
art, exist and do not exist); but if the 'this' exists apart from
the concrete thing, it is only in the case of natural objects. And
so Plato was not far wrong when he said that there are as many Forms
as there are kinds of natural object (if there are Forms distinct
from the things of this earth). The moving causes exist as things
preceding the effects, but causes in the sense of definitions are
simultaneous with their effects. For when a man is healthy, then health
also exists; and the shape of a bronze sphere exists at the same time
as the bronze sphere. (But we must examine whether any form also survives
afterwards. For in some cases there is nothing to prevent this; e.g.
the soul may be of this sort-not all soul but the reason; for presumably
it is impossible that all soul should survive.) Evidently then there
is no necessity, on this ground at least, for the existence of the
Ideas. For man is begotten by man, a given man by an individual father;
and similarly in the arts; for the medical art is the formal cause
of health. 

Part 4 "

"The causes and the principles of different things are in a sense
different, but in a sense, if one speaks universally and analogically,
they are the same for all. For one might raise the question whether
the principles and elements are different or the same for substances
and for relative terms, and similarly in the case of each of the categories.
But it would be paradoxical if they were the same for all. For then
from the same elements will proceed relative terms and substances.
What then will this common element be? For (1, a) there is nothing
common to and distinct from substance and the other categories, viz.
those which are predicated; but an element is prior to the things
of which it is an element. But again (b) substance is not an element
in relative terms, nor is any of these an element in substance. Further,
(2) how can all things have the same elements? For none of the elements
can be the same as that which is composed of elements, e.g. b or a
cannot be the same as ba. (None, therefore, of the intelligibles,
e.g. being or unity, is an element; for these are predicable of each
of the compounds as well.) None of the elements, then, will be either
a substance or a relative term; but it must be one or other. All things,
then, have not the same elements. 

"Or, as we are wont to put it, in a sense they have and in a sense
they have not; e.g. perhaps the elements of perceptible bodies are,
as form, the hot, and in another sense the cold, which is the privation;
and, as matter, that which directly and of itself potentially has
these attributes; and substances comprise both these and the things
composed of these, of which these are the principles, or any unity
which is produced out of the hot and the cold, e.g. flesh or bone;
for the product must be different from the elements. These things
then have the same elements and principles (though specifically different
things have specifically different elements); but all things have
not the same elements in this sense, but only analogically; i.e. one
might say that there are three principles-the form, the privation,
and the matter. But each of these is different for each class; e.g.
in colour they are white, black, and surface, and in day and night
they are light, darkness, and air. 

"Since not only the elements present in a thing are causes, but also
something external, i.e. the moving cause, clearly while 'principle'
and 'element' are different both are causes, and 'principle' is divided
into these two kinds; and that which acts as producing movement or
rest is a principle and a substance. Therefore analogically there
are three elements, and four causes and principles; but the elements
are different in different things, and the proximate moving cause
is different for different things. Health, disease, body; the moving
cause is the medical art. Form, disorder of a particular kind, bricks;
the moving cause is the building art. And since the moving cause in
the case of natural things is-for man, for instance, man, and in the
products of thought the form or its contrary, there will be in a sense
three causes, while in a sense there are four. For the medical art
is in some sense health, and the building art is the form of the house,
and man begets man; further, besides these there is that which as
first of all things moves all things. 

Part 5 "

"Some things can exist apart and some cannot, and it is the former
that are substances. And therefore all things have the same causes,
because, without substances, modifications and movements do not exist.
Further, these causes will probably be soul and body, or reason and
desire and body. 

"And in yet another way, analogically identical things are principles,
i.e. actuality and potency; but these also are not only different
for different things but also apply in different ways to them. For
in some cases the same thing exists at one time actually and at another
potentially, e.g. wine or flesh or man does so. (And these too fall
under the above-named causes. For the form exists actually, if it
can exist apart, and so does the complex of form and matter, and the
privation, e.g. darkness or disease; but the matter exists potentially;
for this is that which can become qualified either by the form or
by the privation.) But the distinction of actuality and potentiality
applies in another way to cases where the matter of cause and of effect
is not the same, in some of which cases the form is not the same but
different; e.g. the cause of man is (1) the elements in man (viz.
fire and earth as matter, and the peculiar form), and further (2)
something else outside, i.e. the father, and (3) besides these the
sun and its oblique course, which are neither matter nor form nor
privation of man nor of the same species with him, but moving causes.

"Further, one must observe that some causes can be expressed in universal
terms, and some cannot. The proximate principles of all things are
the 'this' which is proximate in actuality, and another which is proximate
in potentiality. The universal causes, then, of which we spoke do
not exist. For it is the individual that is the originative principle
of the individuals. For while man is the originative principle of
man universally, there is no universal man, but Peleus is the originative
principle of Achilles, and your father of you, and this particular
b of this particular ba, though b in general is the originative principle
of ba taken without qualification. 

"Further, if the causes of substances are the causes of all things,
yet different things have different causes and elements, as was said;
the causes of things that are not in the same class, e.g. of colours
and sounds, of substances and quantities, are different except in
an analogical sense; and those of things in the same species are different,
not in species, but in the sense that the causes of different individuals
are different, your matter and form and moving cause being different
from mine, while in their universal definition they are the same.
And if we inquire what are the principles or elements of substances
and relations and qualities-whether they are the same or different-clearly
when the names of the causes are used in several senses the causes
of each are the same, but when the senses are distinguished the causes
are not the same but different, except that in the following senses
the causes of all are the same. They are (1) the same or analogous
in this sense, that matter, form, privation, and the moving cause
are common to all things; and (2) the causes of substances may be
treated as causes of all things in this sense, that when substances
are removed all things are removed; further, (3) that which is first
in respect of complete reality is the cause of all things. But in
another sense there are different first causes, viz. all the contraries
which are neither generic nor ambiguous terms; and, further, the matters
of different things are different. We have stated, then, what are
the principles of sensible things and how many they are, and in what
sense they are the same and in what sense different. 

Part 6 "

"Since there were three kinds of substance, two of them physical and
one unmovable, regarding the latter we must assert that it is necessary
that there should be an eternal unmovable substance. For substances
are the first of existing things, and if they are all destructible,
all things are destructible. But it is impossible that movement should
either have come into being or cease to be (for it must always have
existed), or that time should. For there could not be a before and
an after if time did not exist. Movement also is continuous, then,
in the sense in which time is; for time is either the same thing as
movement or an attribute of movement. And there is no continuous movement
except movement in place, and of this only that which is circular
is continuous. 

"But if there is something which is capable of moving things or acting
on them, but is not actually doing so, there will not necessarily
be movement; for that which has a potency need not exercise it. Nothing,
then, is gained even if we suppose eternal substances, as the believers
in the Forms do, unless there is to be in them some principle which
can cause change; nay, even this is not enough, nor is another substance
besides the Forms enough; for if it is not to act, there will be no
movement. Further even if it acts, this will not be enough, if its
essence is potency; for there will not be eternal movement, since
that which is potentially may possibly not be. There must, then, be
such a principle, whose very essence is actuality. Further, then,
these substances must be without matter; for they must be eternal,
if anything is eternal. Therefore they must be actuality.

"Yet there is a difficulty; for it is thought that everything that
acts is able to act, but that not everything that is able to act acts,
so that the potency is prior. But if this is so, nothing that is need
be; for it is possible for all things to be capable of existing but
not yet to exist. 

"Yet if we follow the theologians who generate the world from night,
or the natural philosophers who say that 'all things were together',
the same impossible result ensues. For how will there be movement,
if there is no actually existing cause? Wood will surely not move
itself-the carpenter's art must act on it; nor will the menstrual
blood nor the earth set themselves in motion, but the seeds must act
on the earth and the semen on the menstrual blood. 

"This is why some suppose eternal actuality-e.g. Leucippus and Plato;
for they say there is always movement. But why and what this movement
is they do say, nor, if the world moves in this way or that, do they
tell us the cause of its doing so. Now nothing is moved at random,
but there must always be something present to move it; e.g. as a matter
of fact a thing moves in one way by nature, and in another by force
or through the influence of reason or something else. (Further, what
sort of movement is primary? This makes a vast difference.) But again
for Plato, at least, it is not permissible to name here that which
he sometimes supposes to be the source of movement-that which moves
itself; for the soul is later, and coeval with the heavens, according
to his account. To suppose potency prior to actuality, then, is in
a sense right, and in a sense not; and we have specified these senses.
That actuality is prior is testified by Anaxagoras (for his 'reason'
is actuality) and by Empedocles in his doctrine of love and strife,
and by those who say that there is always movement, e.g. Leucippus.
Therefore chaos or night did not exist for an infinite time, but the
same things have always existed (either passing through a cycle of
changes or obeying some other law), since actuality is prior to potency.
If, then, there is a constant cycle, something must always remain,
acting in the same way. And if there is to be generation and destruction,
there must be something else which is always acting in different ways.
This must, then, act in one way in virtue of itself, and in another
in virtue of something else-either of a third agent, therefore, or
of the first. Now it must be in virtue of the first. For otherwise
this again causes the motion both of the second agent and of the third.
Therefore it is better to say 'the first'. For it was the cause of
eternal uniformity; and something else is the cause of variety, and
evidently both together are the cause of eternal variety. This, accordingly,
is the character which the motions actually exhibit. What need then
is there to seek for other principles? 

Part 7 "

"Since (1) this is a possible account of the matter, and (2) if it
were not true, the world would have proceeded out of night and 'all
things together' and out of non-being, these difficulties may be taken
as solved. There is, then, something which is always moved with an
unceasing motion, which is motion in a circle; and this is plain not
in theory only but in fact. Therefore the first heaven must be eternal.
There is therefore also something which moves it. And since that which
moves and is moved is intermediate, there is something which moves
without being moved, being eternal, substance, and actuality. And
the object of desire and the object of thought move in this way; they
move without being moved. The primary objects of desire and of thought
are the same. For the apparent good is the object of appetite, and
the real good is the primary object of rational wish. But desire is
consequent on opinion rather than opinion on desire; for the thinking
is the starting-point. And thought is moved by the object of thought,
and one of the two columns of opposites is in itself the object of
thought; and in this, substance is first, and in substance, that which
is simple and exists actually. (The one and the simple are not the
same; for 'one' means a measure, but 'simple' means that the thing
itself has a certain nature.) But the beautiful, also, and that which
is in itself desirable are in the same column; and the first in any
class is always best, or analogous to the best. 

"That a final cause may exist among unchangeable entities is shown
by the distinction of its meanings. For the final cause is (a) some
being for whose good an action is done, and (b) something at which
the action aims; and of these the latter exists among unchangeable
entities though the former does not. The final cause, then, produces
motion as being loved, but all other things move by being moved. Now
if something is moved it is capable of being otherwise than as it
is. Therefore if its actuality is the primary form of spatial motion,
then in so far as it is subject to change, in this respect it is capable
of being otherwise,-in place, even if not in substance. But since
there is something which moves while itself unmoved, existing actually,
this can in no way be otherwise than as it is. For motion in space
is the first of the kinds of change, and motion in a circle the first
kind of spatial motion; and this the first mover produces. The first
mover, then, exists of necessity; and in so far as it exists by necessity,
its mode of being is good, and it is in this sense a first principle.
For the necessary has all these senses-that which is necessary perforce
because it is contrary to the natural impulse, that without which
the good is impossible, and that which cannot be otherwise but can
exist only in a single way. 

"On such a principle, then, depend the heavens and the world of nature.
And it is a life such as the best which we enjoy, and enjoy for but
a short time (for it is ever in this state, which we cannot be), since
its actuality is also pleasure. (And for this reason are waking, perception,
and thinking most pleasant, and hopes and memories are so on account
of these.) And thinking in itself deals with that which is best in
itself, and that which is thinking in the fullest sense with that
which is best in the fullest sense. And thought thinks on itself because
it shares the nature of the object of thought; for it becomes an object
of thought in coming into contact with and thinking its objects, so
that thought and object of thought are the same. For that which is
capable of receiving the object of thought, i.e. the essence, is thought.
But it is active when it possesses this object. Therefore the possession
rather than the receptivity is the divine element which thought seems
to contain, and the act of contemplation is what is most pleasant
and best. If, then, God is always in that good state in which we sometimes
are, this compels our wonder; and if in a better this compels it yet
more. And God is in a better state. And life also belongs to God;
for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that actuality; and
God's self-dependent actuality is life most good and eternal. We say
therefore that God is a living being, eternal, most good, so that
life and duration continuous and eternal belong to God; for this is
God. 

"Those who suppose, as the Pythagoreans and Speusippus do, that supreme
beauty and goodness are not present in the beginning, because the
beginnings both of plants and of animals are causes, but beauty and
completeness are in the effects of these, are wrong in their opinion.
For the seed comes from other individuals which are prior and complete,
and the first thing is not seed but the complete being; e.g. we must
say that before the seed there is a man,-not the man produced from
the seed, but another from whom the seed comes. 

"It is clear then from what has been said that there is a substance
which is eternal and unmovable and separate from sensible things.
It has been shown also that this substance cannot have any magnitude,
but is without parts and indivisible (for it produces movement through
infinite time, but nothing finite has infinite power; and, while every
magnitude is either infinite or finite, it cannot, for the above reason,
have finite magnitude, and it cannot have infinite magnitude because
there is no infinite magnitude at all). But it has also been shown
that it is impassive and unalterable; for all the other changes are
posterior to change of place. 

Part 8 "

"It is clear, then, why these things are as they are. But we must
not ignore the question whether we have to suppose one such substance
or more than one, and if the latter, how many; we must also mention,
regarding the opinions expressed by others, that they have said nothing
about the number of the substances that can even be clearly stated.
For the theory of Ideas has no special discussion of the subject;
for those who speak of Ideas say the Ideas are numbers, and they speak
of numbers now as unlimited, now as limited by the number 10; but
as for the reason why there should be just so many numbers, nothing
is said with any demonstrative exactness. We however must discuss
the subject, starting from the presuppositions and distinctions we
have mentioned. The first principle or primary being is not movable
either in itself or accidentally, but produces the primary eternal
and single movement. But since that which is moved must be moved by
something, and the first mover must be in itself unmovable, and eternal
movement must be produced by something eternal and a single movement
by a single thing, and since we see that besides the simple spatial
movement of the universe, which we say the first and unmovable substance
produces, there are other spatial movements-those of the planets-which
are eternal (for a body which moves in a circle is eternal and unresting;
we have proved these points in the physical treatises), each of these
movements also must be caused by a substance both unmovable in itself
and eternal. For the nature of the stars is eternal just because it
is a certain kind of substance, and the mover is eternal and prior
to the moved, and that which is prior to a substance must be a substance.
Evidently, then, there must be substances which are of the same number
as the movements of the stars, and in their nature eternal, and in
themselves unmovable, and without magnitude, for the reason before
mentioned. That the movers are substances, then, and that one of these
is first and another second according to the same order as the movements
of the stars, is evident. But in the number of the movements we reach
a problem which must be treated from the standpoint of that one of
the mathematical sciences which is most akin to philosophy-viz. of
astronomy; for this science speculates about substance which is perceptible
but eternal, but the other mathematical sciences, i.e. arithmetic
and geometry, treat of no substance. That the movements are more numerous
than the bodies that are moved is evident to those who have given
even moderate attention to the matter; for each of the planets has
more than one movement. But as to the actual number of these movements,
we now-to give some notion of the subject-quote what some of the mathematicians
say, that our thought may have some definite number to grasp; but,
for the rest, we must partly investigate for ourselves, Partly learn
from other investigators, and if those who study this subject form
an opinion contrary to what we have now stated, we must esteem both
parties indeed, but follow the more accurate. 

"Eudoxus supposed that the motion of the sun or of the moon involves,
in either case, three spheres, of which the first is the sphere of
the fixed stars, and the second moves in the circle which runs along
the middle of the zodiac, and the third in the circle which is inclined
across the breadth of the zodiac; but the circle in which the moon
moves is inclined at a greater angle than that in which the sun moves.
And the motion of the planets involves, in each case, four spheres,
and of these also the first and second are the same as the first two
mentioned above (for the sphere of the fixed stars is that which moves
all the other spheres, and that which is placed beneath this and has
its movement in the circle which bisects the zodiac is common to all),
but the poles of the third sphere of each planet are in the circle
which bisects the zodiac, and the motion of the fourth sphere is in
the circle which is inclined at an angle to the equator of the third
sphere; and the poles of the third sphere are different for each of
the other planets, but those of Venus and Mercury are the same.

"Callippus made the position of the spheres the same as Eudoxus did,
but while he assigned the same number as Eudoxus did to Jupiter and
to Saturn, he thought two more spheres should be added to the sun
and two to the moon, if one is to explain the observed facts; and
one more to each of the other planets. 

"But it is necessary, if all the spheres combined are to explain the
observed facts, that for each of the planets there should be other
spheres (one fewer than those hitherto assigned) which counteract
those already mentioned and bring back to the same position the outermost
sphere of the star which in each case is situated below the star in
question; for only thus can all the forces at work produce the observed
motion of the planets. Since, then, the spheres involved in the movement
of the planets themselves are--eight for Saturn and Jupiter and twenty-five
for the others, and of these only those involved in the movement of
the lowest-situated planet need not be counteracted the spheres which
counteract those of the outermost two planets will be six in number,
and the spheres which counteract those of the next four planets will
be sixteen; therefore the number of all the spheres--both those which
move the planets and those which counteract these--will be fifty-five.
And if one were not to add to the moon and to the sun the movements
we mentioned, the whole set of spheres will be forty-seven in number.

"Let this, then, be taken as the number of the spheres, so that the
unmovable substances and principles also may probably be taken as
just so many; the assertion of necessity must be left to more powerful
thinkers. But if there can be no spatial movement which does not conduce
to the moving of a star, and if further every being and every substance
which is immune from change and in virtue of itself has attained to
the best must be considered an end, there can be no other being apart
from these we have named, but this must be the number of the substances.
For if there are others, they will cause change as being a final cause
of movement; but there cannot he other movements besides those mentioned.
And it is reasonable to infer this from a consideration of the bodies
that are moved; for if everything that moves is for the sake of that
which is moved, and every movement belongs to something that is moved,
no movement can be for the sake of itself or of another movement,
but all the movements must be for the sake of the stars. For if there
is to be a movement for the sake of a movement, this latter also will
have to be for the sake of something else; so that since there cannot
be an infinite regress, the end of every movement will be one of the
divine bodies which move through the heaven. 

"(Evidently there is but one heaven. For if there are many heavens
as there are many men, the moving principles, of which each heaven
will have one, will be one in form but in number many. But all things
that are many in number have matter; for one and the same definition,
e.g. that of man, applies to many things, while Socrates is one. But
the primary essence has not matter; for it is complete reality. So
the unmovable first mover is one both in definition and in number;
so too, therefore, is that which is moved always and continuously;
therefore there is one heaven alone.) Our forefathers in the most
remote ages have handed down to their posterity a tradition, in the
form of a myth, that these bodies are gods, and that the divine encloses
the whole of nature. The rest of the tradition has been added later
in mythical form with a view to the persuasion of the multitude and
to its legal and utilitarian expediency; they say these gods are in
the form of men or like some of the other animals, and they say other
things consequent on and similar to these which we have mentioned.
But if one were to separate the first point from these additions and
take it alone-that they thought the first substances to be gods, one
must regard this as an inspired utterance, and reflect that, while
probably each art and each science has often been developed as far
as possible and has again perished, these opinions, with others, have
been preserved until the present like relics of the ancient treasure.
Only thus far, then, is the opinion of our ancestors and of our earliest
predecessors clear to us. 

Part 9 "

"The nature of the divine thought involves certain problems; for while
thought is held to be the most divine of things observed by us, the
question how it must be situated in order to have that character involves
difficulties. For if it thinks of nothing, what is there here of dignity?
It is just like one who sleeps. And if it thinks, but this depends
on something else, then (since that which is its substance is not
the act of thinking, but a potency) it cannot be the best substance;
for it is through thinking that its value belongs to it. Further,
whether its substance is the faculty of thought or the act of thinking,
what does it think of? Either of itself or of something else; and
if of something else, either of the same thing always or of something
different. Does it matter, then, or not, whether it thinks of the
good or of any chance thing? Are there not some things about which
it is incredible that it should think? Evidently, then, it thinks
of that which is most divine and precious, and it does not change;
for change would be change for the worse, and this would be already
a movement. First, then, if 'thought' is not the act of thinking but
a potency, it would be reasonable to suppose that the continuity of
its thinking is wearisome to it. Secondly, there would evidently be
something else more precious than thought, viz. that which is thought
of. For both thinking and the act of thought will belong even to one
who thinks of the worst thing in the world, so that if this ought
to be avoided (and it ought, for there are even some things which
it is better not to see than to see), the act of thinking cannot be
the best of things. Therefore it must be of itself that the divine
thought thinks (since it is the most excellent of things), and its
thinking is a thinking on thinking. 

"But evidently knowledge and perception and opinion and understanding
have always something else as their object, and themselves only by
the way. Further, if thinking and being thought of are different,
in respect of which does goodness belong to thought? For to he an
act of thinking and to he an object of thought are not the same thing.
We answer that in some cases the knowledge is the object. In the productive
sciences it is the substance or essence of the object, matter omitted,
and in the theoretical sciences the definition or the act of thinking
is the object. Since, then, thought and the object of thought are
not different in the case of things that have not matter, the divine
thought and its object will be the same, i.e. the thinking will be
one with the object of its thought. 

"A further question is left-whether the object of the divine thought
is composite; for if it were, thought would change in passing from
part to part of the whole. We answer that everything which has not
matter is indivisible-as human thought, or rather the thought of composite
beings, is in a certain period of time (for it does not possess the
good at this moment or at that, but its best, being something different
from it, is attained only in a whole period of time), so throughout
eternity is the thought which has itself for its object.

Part 10 "

"We must consider also in which of two ways the nature of the universe
contains the good, and the highest good, whether as something separate
and by itself, or as the order of the parts. Probably in both ways,
as an army does; for its good is found both in its order and in its
leader, and more in the latter; for he does not depend on the order
but it depends on him. And all things are ordered together somehow,
but not all alike,-both fishes and fowls and plants; and the world
is not such that one thing has nothing to do with another, but they
are connected. For all are ordered together to one end, but it is
as in a house, where the freemen are least at liberty to act at random,
but all things or most things are already ordained for them, while
the slaves and the animals do little for the common good, and for
the most part live at random; for this is the sort of principle that
constitutes the nature of each. I mean, for instance, that all must
at least come to be dissolved into their elements, and there are other
functions similarly in which all share for the good of the whole.

"We must not fail to observe how many impossible or paradoxical results
confront those who hold different views from our own, and what are
the views of the subtler thinkers, and which views are attended by
fewest difficulties. All make all things out of contraries. But neither
'all things' nor 'out of contraries' is right; nor do these thinkers
tell us how all the things in which the contraries are present can
be made out of the contraries; for contraries are not affected by
one another. Now for us this difficulty is solved naturally by the
fact that there is a third element. These thinkers however make one
of the two contraries matter; this is done for instance by those who
make the unequal matter for the equal, or the many matter for the
one. But this also is refuted in the same way; for the one matter
which underlies any pair of contraries is contrary to nothing. Further,
all things, except the one, will, on the view we are criticizing,
partake of evil; for the bad itself is one of the two elements. But
the other school does not treat the good and the bad even as principles;
yet in all things the good is in the highest degree a principle. The
school we first mentioned is right in saying that it is a principle,
but how the good is a principle they do not say-whether as end or
as mover or as form. 

"Empedocles also has a paradoxical view; for he identifies the good
with love, but this is a principle both as mover (for it brings things
together) and as matter (for it is part of the mixture). Now even
if it happens that the same thing is a principle both as matter and
as mover, still the being, at least, of the two is not the same. In
which respect then is love a principle? It is paradoxical also that
strife should be imperishable; the nature of his 'evil' is just strife.

"Anaxagoras makes the good a motive principle; for his 'reason' moves
things. But it moves them for an end, which must be something other
than it, except according to our way of stating the case; for, on
our view, the medical art is in a sense health. It is paradoxical
also not to suppose a contrary to the good, i.e. to reason. But all
who speak of the contraries make no use of the contraries, unless
we bring their views into shape. And why some things are perishable
and others imperishable, no one tells us; for they make all existing
things out of the same principles. Further, some make existing things
out of the nonexistent; and others to avoid the necessity of this
make all things one. 

"Further, why should there always be becoming, and what is the cause
of becoming?-this no one tells us. And those who suppose two principles
must suppose another, a superior principle, and so must those who
believe in the Forms; for why did things come to participate, or why
do they participate, in the Forms? And all other thinkers are confronted
by the necessary consequence that there is something contrary to Wisdom,
i.e. to the highest knowledge; but we are not. For there is nothing
contrary to that which is primary; for all contraries have matter,
and things that have matter exist only potentially; and the ignorance
which is contrary to any knowledge leads to an object contrary to
the object of the knowledge; but what is primary has no contrary.

"Again, if besides sensible things no others exist, there will be
no first principle, no order, no becoming, no heavenly bodies, but
each principle will have a principle before it, as in the accounts
of the theologians and all the natural philosophers. But if the Forms
or the numbers are to exist, they will be causes of nothing; or if
not that, at least not of movement. Further, how is extension, i.e.
a continuum, to be produced out of unextended parts? For number will
not, either as mover or as form, produce a continuum. But again there
cannot be any contrary that is also essentially a productive or moving
principle; for it would be possible for it not to be. Or at least
its action would be posterior to its potency. The world, then, would
not be eternal. But it is; one of these premisses, then, must be denied.
And we have said how this must be done. Further, in virtue of what
the numbers, or the soul and the body, or in general the form and
the thing, are one-of this no one tells us anything; nor can any one
tell, unless he says, as we do, that the mover makes them one. And
those who say mathematical number is first and go on to generate one
kind of substance after another and give different principles for
each, make the substance of the universe a mere series of episodes
(for one substance has no influence on another by its existence or
nonexistence), and they give us many governing principles; but the
world refuses to be governed badly. "

"'The rule of many is not good; one ruler let there be.'



BOOK XIII

Part 1 

"

"WE have stated what is the substance of sensible things, dealing
in the treatise on physics with matter, and later with the substance
which has actual existence. Now since our inquiry is whether there
is or is not besides the sensible substances any which is immovable
and eternal, and, if there is, what it is, we must first consider
what is said by others, so that, if there is anything which they say
wrongly, we may not be liable to the same objections, while, if there
is any opinion common to them and us, we shall have no private grievance
against ourselves on that account; for one must be content to state
some points better than one's predecessors, and others no worse.

"Two opinions are held on this subject; it is said that the objects
of mathematics-i.e. numbers and lines and the like-are substances,
and again that the Ideas are substances. And (1) since some recognize
these as two different classes-the Ideas and the mathematical numbers,
and (2) some recognize both as having one nature, while (3) some others
say that the mathematical substances are the only substances, we must
consider first the objects of mathematics, not qualifying them by
any other characteristic-not asking, for instance, whether they are
in fact Ideas or not, or whether they are the principles and substances
of existing things or not, but only whether as objects of mathematics
they exist or not, and if they exist, how they exist. Then after this
we must separately consider the Ideas themselves in a general way,
and only as far as the accepted mode of treatment demands; for most
of the points have been repeatedly made even by the discussions outside
our school, and, further, the greater part of our account must finish
by throwing light on that inquiry, viz. when we examine whether the
substances and the principles of existing things are numbers and Ideas;
for after the discussion of the Ideas this remans as a third inquiry.

"If the objects of mathematics exist, they must exist either in sensible
objects, as some say, or separate from sensible objects (and this
also is said by some); or if they exist in neither of these ways,
either they do not exist, or they exist only in some special sense.
So that the subject of our discussion will be not whether they exist
but how they exist. 

Part 2 "

"That it is impossible for mathematical objects to exist in sensible
things, and at the same time that the doctrine in question is an artificial
one, has been said already in our discussion of difficulties we have
pointed out that it is impossible for two solids to be in the same
place, and also that according to the same argument the other powers
and characteristics also should exist in sensible things and none
of them separately. This we have said already. But, further, it is
obvious that on this theory it is impossible for any body whatever
to be divided; for it would have to be divided at a plane, and the
plane at a line, and the line at a point, so that if the point cannot
be divided, neither can the line, and if the line cannot, neither
can the plane nor the solid. What difference, then, does it make whether
sensible things are such indivisible entities, or, without being so
themselves, have indivisible entities in them? The result will be
the same; if the sensible entities are divided the others will be
divided too, or else not even the sensible entities can be divided.

"But, again, it is not possible that such entities should exist separately.
For if besides the sensible solids there are to be other solids which
are separate from them and prior to the sensible solids, it is plain
that besides the planes also there must be other and separate planes
and points and lines; for consistency requires this. But if these
exist, again besides the planes and lines and points of the mathematical
solid there must be others which are separate. (For incomposites are
prior to compounds; and if there are, prior to the sensible bodies,
bodies which are not sensible, by the same argument the planes which
exist by themselves must be prior to those which are in the motionless
solids. Therefore these will be planes and lines other than those
that exist along with the mathematical solids to which these thinkers
assign separate existence; for the latter exist along with the mathematical
solids, while the others are prior to the mathematical solids.) Again,
therefore, there will be, belonging to these planes, lines, and prior
to them there will have to be, by the same argument, other lines and
points; and prior to these points in the prior lines there will have
to be other points, though there will be no others prior to these.
Now (1) the accumulation becomes absurd; for we find ourselves with
one set of solids apart from the sensible solids; three sets of planes
apart from the sensible planes-those which exist apart from the sensible
planes, and those in the mathematical solids, and those which exist
apart from those in the mathematical solids; four sets of lines, and
five sets of points. With which of these, then, will the mathematical
sciences deal? Certainly not with the planes and lines and points
in the motionless solid; for science always deals with what is prior.
And (the same account will apply also to numbers; for there will be
a different set of units apart from each set of points, and also apart
from each set of realities, from the objects of sense and again from
those of thought; so that there will be various classes of mathematical
numbers. 

"Again, how is it possible to solve the questions which we have already
enumerated in our discussion of difficulties? For the objects of astronomy
will exist apart from sensible things just as the objects of geometry
will; but how is it possible that a heaven and its parts-or anything
else which has movement-should exist apart? Similarly also the objects
of optics and of harmonics will exist apart; for there will be both
voice and sight besides the sensible or individual voices and sights.
Therefore it is plain that the other senses as well, and the other
objects of sense, will exist apart; for why should one set of them
do so and another not? And if this is so, there will also be animals
existing apart, since there will be senses. 

"Again, there are certain mathematical theorems that are universal,
extending beyond these substances. Here then we shall have another
intermediate substance separate both from the Ideas and from the intermediates,-a
substance which is neither number nor points nor spatial magnitude
nor time. And if this is impossible, plainly it is also impossible
that the former entities should exist separate from sensible things.

"And, in general, conclusion contrary alike to the truth and to the
usual views follow, if one is to suppose the objects of mathematics
to exist thus as separate entities. For because they exist thus they
must be prior to sensible spatial magnitudes, but in truth they must
be posterior; for the incomplete spatial magnitude is in the order
of generation prior, but in the order of substance posterior, as the
lifeless is to the living. 

"Again, by virtue of what, and when, will mathematical magnitudes
be one? For things in our perceptible world are one in virtue of soul,
or of a part of soul, or of something else that is reasonable enough;
when these are not present, the thing is a plurality, and splits up
into parts. But in the case of the subjects of mathematics, which
are divisible and are quantities, what is the cause of their being
one and holding together? 

"Again, the modes of generation of the objects of mathematics show
that we are right. For the dimension first generated is length, then
comes breadth, lastly depth, and the process is complete. If, then,
that which is posterior in the order of generation is prior in the
order of substantiality, the solid will be prior to the plane and
the line. And in this way also it is both more complete and more whole,
because it can become animate. How, on the other hand, could a line
or a plane be animate? The supposition passes the power of our senses.

"Again, the solid is a sort of substance; for it already has in a
sense completeness. But how can lines be substances? Neither as a
form or shape, as the soul perhaps is, nor as matter, like the solid;
for we have no experience of anything that can be put together out
of lines or planes or points, while if these had been a sort of material
substance, we should have observed things which could be put together
out of them. 

"Grant, then, that they are prior in definition. Still not all things
that are prior in definition are also prior in substantiality. For
those things are prior in substantiality which when separated from
other things surpass them in the power of independent existence, but
things are prior in definition to those whose definitions are compounded
out of their definitions; and these two properties are not coextensive.
For if attributes do not exist apart from the substances (e.g. a 'mobile'
or a pale'), pale is prior to the pale man in definition, but not
in substantiality. For it cannot exist separately, but is always along
with the concrete thing; and by the concrete thing I mean the pale
man. Therefore it is plain that neither is the result of abstraction
prior nor that which is produced by adding determinants posterior;
for it is by adding a determinant to pale that we speak of the pale
man. 

"It has, then, been sufficiently pointed out that the objects of mathematics
are not substances in a higher degree than bodies are, and that they
are not prior to sensibles in being, but only in definition, and that
they cannot exist somewhere apart. But since it was not possible for
them to exist in sensibles either, it is plain that they either do
not exist at all or exist in a special sense and therefore do not
'exist' without qualification. For 'exist' has many senses.

Part 3 "

"For just as the universal propositions of mathematics deal not with
objects which exist separately, apart from extended magnitudes and
from numbers, but with magnitudes and numbers, not however qua such
as to have magnitude or to be divisible, clearly it is possible that
there should also be both propositions and demonstrations about sensible
magnitudes, not however qua sensible but qua possessed of certain
definite qualities. For as there are many propositions about things
merely considered as in motion, apart from what each such thing is
and from their accidents, and as it is not therefore necessary that
there should be either a mobile separate from sensibles, or a distinct
mobile entity in the sensibles, so too in the case of mobiles there
will be propositions and sciences, which treat them however not qua
mobile but only qua bodies, or again only qua planes, or only qua
lines, or qua divisibles, or qua indivisibles having position, or
only qua indivisibles. Thus since it is true to say without qualification
that not only things which are separable but also things which are
inseparable exist (for instance, that mobiles exist), it is true also
to say without qualification that the objects of mathematics exist,
and with the character ascribed to them by mathematicians. And as
it is true to say of the other sciences too, without qualification,
that they deal with such and such a subject-not with what is accidental
to it (e.g. not with the pale, if the healthy thing is pale, and the
science has the healthy as its subject), but with that which is the
subject of each science-with the healthy if it treats its object qua
healthy, with man if qua man:-so too is it with geometry; if its subjects
happen to be sensible, though it does not treat them qua sensible,
the mathematical sciences will not for that reason be sciences of
sensibles-nor, on the other hand, of other things separate from sensibles.
Many properties attach to things in virtue of their own nature as
possessed of each such character; e.g. there are attributes peculiar
to the animal qua female or qua male (yet there is no 'female' nor
'male' separate from animals); so that there are also attributes which
belong to things merely as lengths or as planes. And in proportion
as we are dealing with things which are prior in definition and simpler,
our knowledge has more accuracy, i.e. simplicity. Therefore a science
which abstracts from spatial magnitude is more precise than one which
takes it into account; and a science is most precise if it abstracts
from movement, but if it takes account of movement, it is most precise
if it deals with the primary movement, for this is the simplest; and
of this again uniform movement is the simplest form. 

"The same account may be given of harmonics and optics; for neither
considers its objects qua sight or qua voice, but qua lines and numbers;
but the latter are attributes proper to the former. And mechanics
too proceeds in the same way. Therefore if we suppose attributes separated
from their fellow attributes and make any inquiry concerning them
as such, we shall not for this reason be in error, any more than when
one draws a line on the ground and calls it a foot long when it is
not; for the error is not included in the premisses. 

"Each question will be best investigated in this way-by setting up
by an act of separation what is not separate, as the arithmetician
and the geometer do. For a man qua man is one indivisible thing; and
the arithmetician supposed one indivisible thing, and then considered
whether any attribute belongs to a man qua indivisible. But the geometer
treats him neither qua man nor qua indivisible, but as a solid. For
evidently the properties which would have belonged to him even if
perchance he had not been indivisible, can belong to him even apart
from these attributes. Thus, then, geometers speak correctly; they
talk about existing things, and their subjects do exist; for being
has two forms-it exists not only in complete reality but also materially.

"Now since the good and the beautiful are different (for the former
always implies conduct as its subject, while the beautiful is found
also in motionless things), those who assert that the mathematical
sciences say nothing of the beautiful or the good are in error. For
these sciences say and prove a great deal about them; if they do not
expressly mention them, but prove attributes which are their results
or their definitions, it is not true to say that they tell us nothing
about them. The chief forms of beauty are order and symmetry and definiteness,
which the mathematical sciences demonstrate in a special degree. And
since these (e.g. order and definiteness) are obviously causes of
many things, evidently these sciences must treat this sort of causative
principle also (i.e. the beautiful) as in some sense a cause. But
we shall speak more plainly elsewhere about these matters.

Part 4 "

"So much then for the objects of mathematics; we have said that they
exist and in what sense they exist, and in what sense they are prior
and in what sense not prior. Now, regarding the Ideas, we must first
examine the ideal theory itself, not connecting it in any way with
the nature of numbers, but treating it in the form in which it was
originally understood by those who first maintained the existence
of the Ideas. The supporters of the ideal theory were led to it because
on the question about the truth of things they accepted the Heraclitean
sayings which describe all sensible things as ever passing away, so
that if knowledge or thought is to have an object, there must be some
other and permanent entities, apart from those which are sensible;
for there could be no knowledge of things which were in a state of
flux. But when Socrates was occupying himself with the excellences
of character, and in connexion with them became the first to raise
the problem of universal definition (for of the physicists Democritus
only touched on the subject to a small extent, and defined, after
a fashion, the hot and the cold; while the Pythagoreans had before
this treated of a few things, whose definitions-e.g. those of opportunity,
justice, or marriage-they connected with numbers; but it was natural
that Socrates should be seeking the essence, for he was seeking to
syllogize, and 'what a thing is' is the starting-point of syllogisms;
for there was as yet none of the dialectical power which enables people
even without knowledge of the essence to speculate about contraries
and inquire whether the same science deals with contraries; for two
things may be fairly ascribed to Socrates-inductive arguments and
universal definition, both of which are concerned with the starting-point
of science):-but Socrates did not make the universals or the definitions
exist apart: they, however, gave them separate existence, and this
was the kind of thing they called Ideas. Therefore it followed for
them, almost by the same argument, that there must be Ideas of all
things that are spoken of universally, and it was almost as if a man
wished to count certain things, and while they were few thought he
would not be able to count them, but made more of them and then counted
them; for the Forms are, one may say, more numerous than the particular
sensible things, yet it was in seeking the causes of these that they
proceeded from them to the Forms. For to each thing there answers
an entity which has the same name and exists apart from the substances,
and so also in the case of all other groups there is a one over many,
whether these be of this world or eternal. 

"Again, of the ways in which it is proved that the Forms exist, none
is convincing; for from some no inference necessarily follows, and
from some arise Forms even of things of which they think there are
no Forms. For according to the arguments from the sciences there will
be Forms of all things of which there are sciences, and according
to the argument of the 'one over many' there will be Forms even of
negations, and according to the argument that thought has an object
when the individual object has perished, there will be Forms of perishable
things; for we have an image of these. Again, of the most accurate
arguments, some lead to Ideas of relations, of which they say there
is no independent class, and others introduce the 'third man'.

"And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy things for whose
existence the believers in Forms are more zealous than for the existence
of the Ideas; for it follows that not the dyad but number is first,
and that prior to number is the relative, and that this is prior to
the absolute-besides all the other points on which certain people,
by following out the opinions held about the Forms, came into conflict
with the principles of the theory. 

"Again, according to the assumption on the belief in the Ideas rests,
there will be Forms not only of substances but also of many other
things; for the concept is single not only in the case of substances,
but also in that of non-substances, and there are sciences of other
things than substance; and a thousand other such difficulties confront
them. But according to the necessities of the case and the opinions
about the Forms, if they can be shared in there must be Ideas of substances
only. For they are not shared in incidentally, but each Form must
be shared in as something not predicated of a subject. (By 'being
shared in incidentally' I mean that if a thing shares in 'double itself',
it shares also in 'eternal', but incidentally; for 'the double' happens
to be eternal.) Therefore the Forms will be substance. But the same
names indicate substance in this and in the ideal world (or what will
be the meaning of saying that there is something apart from the particulars-the
one over many?). And if the Ideas and the things that share in them
have the same form, there will be something common: for why should
'2' be one and the same in the perishable 2's, or in the 2's which
are many but eternal, and not the same in the '2 itself' as in the
individual 2? But if they have not the same form, they will have only
the name in common, and it is as if one were to call both Callias
and a piece of wood a 'man', without observing any community between
them. 

"But if we are to suppose that in other respects the common definitions
apply to the Forms, e.g. that 'plane figure' and the other parts of
the definition apply to the circle itself, but 'what really is' has
to be added, we must inquire whether this is not absolutely meaningless.
For to what is this to be added? To 'centre' or to 'plane' or to all
the parts of the definition? For all the elements in the essence are
Ideas, e.g. 'animal' and 'two-footed'. Further, there must be some
Ideal answering to 'plane' above, some nature which will be present
in all the Forms as their genus. 

Part 5 "

"Above all one might discuss the question what in the world the Forms
contribute to sensible things, either to those that are eternal or
to those that come into being and cease to be; for they cause neither
movement nor any change in them. But again they help in no wise either
towards the knowledge of other things (for they are not even the substance
of these, else they would have been in them), or towards their being,
if they are not in the individuals which share in them; though if
they were, they might be thought to be causes, as white causes whiteness
in a white object by entering into its composition. But this argument,
which was used first by Anaxagoras, and later by Eudoxus in his discussion
of difficulties and by certain others, is very easily upset; for it
is easy to collect many and insuperable objections to such a view.

"But, further, all other things cannot come from the Forms in any
of the usual senses of 'from'. And to say that they are patterns and
the other things share in them is to use empty words and poetical
metaphors. For what is it that works, looking to the Ideas? And any
thing can both be and come into being without being copied from something
else, so that, whether Socrates exists or not, a man like Socrates
might come to be. And evidently this might be so even if Socrates
were eternal. And there will be several patterns of the same thing,
and therefore several Forms; e.g. 'animal' and 'two-footed', and also
'man-himself', will be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are patterns
not only of sensible things, but of Forms themselves also; i.e. the
genus is the pattern of the various forms-of-a-genus; therefore the
same thing will be pattern and copy. 

"Again, it would seem impossible that substance and that whose substance
it is should exist apart; how, therefore, could the Ideas, being the
substances of things, exist apart? 

"In the Phaedo the case is stated in this way-that the Forms are causes
both of being and of becoming. Yet though the Forms exist, still things
do not come into being, unless there is something to originate movement;
and many other things come into being (e.g. a house or a ring) of
which they say there are no Forms. Clearly therefore even the things
of which they say there are Ideas can both be and come into being
owing to such causes as produce the things just mentioned, and not
owing to the Forms. But regarding the Ideas it is possible, both in
this way and by more abstract and accurate arguments, to collect many
objections like those we have considered. 

Part 6 "

"Since we have discussed these points, it is well to consider again
the results regarding numbers which confront those who say that numbers
are separable substances and first causes of things. If number is
an entity and its substance is nothing other than just number, as
some say, it follows that either (1) there is a first in it and a
second, each being different in species,-and either (a) this is true
of the units without exception, and any unit is inassociable with
any unit, or (b) they are all without exception successive, and any
of them are associable with any, as they say is the case with mathematical
number; for in mathematical number no one unit is in any way different
from another. Or (c) some units must be associable and some not; e.g.
suppose that 2 is first after 1, and then comes 3 and then the rest
of the number series, and the units in each number are associable,
e.g. those in the first 2 are associable with one another, and those
in the first 3 with one another, and so with the other numbers; but
the units in the '2-itself' are inassociable with those in the '3-itself';
and similarly in the case of the other successive numbers. And so
while mathematical number is counted thus-after 1, 2 (which consists
of another 1 besides the former 1), and 3 which consists of another
1 besides these two), and the other numbers similarly, ideal number
is counted thus-after 1, a distinct 2 which does not include the first
1, and a 3 which does not include the 2 and the rest of the number
series similarly. Or (2) one kind of number must be like the first
that was named, one like that which the mathematicians speak of, and
that which we have named last must be a third kind. 

"Again, these kinds of numbers must either be separable from things,
or not separable but in objects of perception (not however in the
way which we first considered, in the sense that objects of perception
consists of numbers which are present in them)-either one kind and
not another, or all of them. 

"These are of necessity the only ways in which the numbers can exist.
And of those who say that the 1 is the beginning and substance and
element of all things, and that number is formed from the 1 and something
else, almost every one has described number in one of these ways;
only no one has said all the units are inassociable. And this has
happened reasonably enough; for there can be no way besides those
mentioned. Some say both kinds of number exist, that which has a before
and after being identical with the Ideas, and mathematical number
being different from the Ideas and from sensible things, and both
being separable from sensible things; and others say mathematical
number alone exists, as the first of realities, separate from sensible
things. And the Pythagoreans, also, believe in one kind of number-the
mathematical; only they say it is not separate but sensible substances
are formed out of it. For they construct the whole universe out of
numbers-only not numbers consisting of abstract units; they suppose
the units to have spatial magnitude. But how the first 1 was constructed
so as to have magnitude, they seem unable to say. 

"Another thinker says the first kind of number, that of the Forms,
alone exists, and some say mathematical number is identical with this.

"The case of lines, planes, and solids is similar. For some think
that those which are the objects of mathematics are different from
those which come after the Ideas; and of those who express themselves
otherwise some speak of the objects of mathematics and in a mathematical
way-viz. those who do not make the Ideas numbers nor say that Ideas
exist; and others speak of the objects of mathematics, but not mathematically;
for they say that neither is every spatial magnitude divisible into
magnitudes, nor do any two units taken at random make 2. All who say
the 1 is an element and principle of things suppose numbers to consist
of abstract units, except the Pythagoreans; but they suppose the numbers
to have magnitude, as has been said before. It is clear from this
statement, then, in how many ways numbers may be described, and that
all the ways have been mentioned; and all these views are impossible,
but some perhaps more than others. 

Part 7 "

"First, then, let us inquire if the units are associable or inassociable,
and if inassociable, in which of the two ways we distinguished. For
it is possible that any unity is inassociable with any, and it is
possible that those in the 'itself' are inassociable with those in
the 'itself', and, generally, that those in each ideal number are
inassociable with those in other ideal numbers. Now (1) all units
are associable and without difference, we get mathematical number-only
one kind of number, and the Ideas cannot be the numbers. For what
sort of number will man-himself or animal-itself or any other Form
be? There is one Idea of each thing e.g. one of man-himself and another
one of animal-itself; but the similar and undifferentiated numbers
are infinitely many, so that any particular 3 is no more man-himself
than any other 3. But if the Ideas are not numbers, neither can they
exist at all. For from what principles will the Ideas come? It is
number that comes from the 1 and the indefinite dyad, and the principles
or elements are said to be principles and elements of number, and
the Ideas cannot be ranked as either prior or posterior to the numbers.

"But (2) if the units are inassociable, and inassociable in the sense
that any is inassociable with any other, number of this sort cannot
be mathematical number; for mathematical number consists of undifferentiated
units, and the truths proved of it suit this character. Nor can it
be ideal number. For 2 will not proceed immediately from 1 and the
indefinite dyad, and be followed by the successive numbers, as they
say '2,3,4' for the units in the ideal are generated at the same time,
whether, as the first holder of the theory said, from unequals (coming
into being when these were equalized) or in some other way-since,
if one unit is to be prior to the other, it will be prior also to
2 the composed of these; for when there is one thing prior and another
posterior, the resultant of these will be prior to one and posterior
to the other. Again, since the 1-itself is first, and then there is
a particular 1 which is first among the others and next after the
1-itself, and again a third which is next after the second and next
but one after the first 1,-so the units must be prior to the numbers
after which they are named when we count them; e.g. there will be
a third unit in 2 before 3 exists, and a fourth and a fifth in 3 before
the numbers 4 and 5 exist.-Now none of these thinkers has said the
units are inassociable in this way, but according to their principles
it is reasonable that they should be so even in this way, though in
truth it is impossible. For it is reasonable both that the units should
have priority and posteriority if there is a first unit or first 1,
and also that the 2's should if there is a first 2; for after the
first it is reasonable and necessary that there should be a second,
and if a second, a third, and so with the others successively. (And
to say both things at the same time, that a unit is first and another
unit is second after the ideal 1, and that a 2 is first after it,
is impossible.) But they make a first unit or 1, but not also a second
and a third, and a first 2, but not also a second and a third. Clearly,
also, it is not possible, if all the units are inassociable, that
there should be a 2-itself and a 3-itself; and so with the other numbers.
For whether the units are undifferentiated or different each from
each, number must be counted by addition, e.g. 2 by adding another
1 to the one, 3 by adding another 1 to the two, and similarly. This
being so, numbers cannot be generated as they generate them, from
the 2 and the 1; for 2 becomes part of 3 and 3 of 4 and the same happens
in the case of the succeeding numbers, but they say 4 came from the
first 2 and the indefinite which makes it two 2's other than the 2-itself;
if not, the 2-itself will be a part of 4 and one other 2 will be added.
And similarly 2 will consist of the 1-itself and another 1; but if
this is so, the other element cannot be an indefinite 2; for it generates
one unit, not, as the indefinite 2 does, a definite 2. 

"Again, besides the 3-itself and the 2-itself how can there be other
3's and 2's? And how do they consist of prior and posterior units?
All this is absurd and fictitious, and there cannot be a first 2 and
then a 3-itself. Yet there must, if the 1 and the indefinite dyad
are to be the elements. But if the results are impossible, it is also
impossible that these are the generating principles. 

"If the units, then, are differentiated, each from each, these results
and others similar to these follow of necessity. But (3) if those
in different numbers are differentiated, but those in the same number
are alone undifferentiated from one another, even so the difficulties
that follow are no less. E.g. in the 10-itself their are ten units,
and the 10 is composed both of them and of two 5's. But since the
10-itself is not any chance number nor composed of any chance 5's--or,
for that matter, units--the units in this 10 must differ. For if they
do not differ, neither will the 5's of which the 10 consists differ;
but since these differ, the units also will differ. But if they differ,
will there be no other 5's in the 10 but only these two, or will there
be others? If there are not, this is paradoxical; and if there are,
what sort of 10 will consist of them? For there is no other in the
10 but the 10 itself. But it is actually necessary on their view that
the 4 should not consist of any chance 2's; for the indefinite as
they say, received the definite 2 and made two 2's; for its nature
was to double what it received. 

"Again, as to the 2 being an entity apart from its two units, and
the 3 an entity apart from its three units, how is this possible?
Either by one's sharing in the other, as 'pale man' is different from
'pale' and 'man' (for it shares in these), or when one is a differentia
of the other, as 'man' is different from 'animal' and 'two-footed'.

"Again, some things are one by contact, some by intermixture, some
by position; none of which can belong to the units of which the 2
or the 3 consists; but as two men are not a unity apart from both,
so must it be with the units. And their being indivisible will make
no difference to them; for points too are indivisible, but yet a pair
of them is nothing apart from the two. 

"But this consequence also we must not forget, that it follows that
there are prior and posterior 2 and similarly with the other numbers.
For let the 2's in the 4 be simultaneous; yet these are prior to those
in the 8 and as the 2 generated them, they generated the 4's in the
8-itself. Therefore if the first 2 is an Idea, these 2's also will
be Ideas of some kind. And the same account applies to the units;
for the units in the first 2 generate the four in 4, so that all the
units come to be Ideas and an Idea will be composed of Ideas. Clearly
therefore those things also of which these happen to be the Ideas
will be composite, e.g. one might say that animals are composed of
animals, if there are Ideas of them. 

"In general, to differentiate the units in any way is an absurdity
and a fiction; and by a fiction I mean a forced statement made to
suit a hypothesis. For neither in quantity nor in quality do we see
unit differing from unit, and number must be either equal or unequal-all
number but especially that which consists of abstract units-so that
if one number is neither greater nor less than another, it is equal
to it; but things that are equal and in no wise differentiated we
take to be the same when we are speaking of numbers. If not, not even
the 2 in the 10-itself will be undifferentiated, though they are equal;
for what reason will the man who alleges that they are not differentiated
be able to give? 

"Again, if every unit + another unit makes two, a unit from the 2-itself
and one from the 3-itself will make a 2. Now (a) this will consist
of differentiated units; and will it be prior to the 3 or posterior?
It rather seems that it must be prior; for one of the units is simultaneous
with the 3 and the other is simultaneous with the 2. And we, for our
part, suppose that in general 1 and 1, whether the things are equal
or unequal, is 2, e.g. the good and the bad, or a man and a horse;
but those who hold these views say that not even two units are 2.

"If the number of the 3-itself is not greater than that of the 2,
this is surprising; and if it is greater, clearly there is also a
number in it equal to the 2, so that this is not different from the
2-itself. But this is not possible, if there is a first and a second
number. 

"Nor will the Ideas be numbers. For in this particular point they
are right who claim that the units must be different, if there are
to be Ideas; as has been said before. For the Form is unique; but
if the units are not different, the 2's and the 3's also will not
be different. This is also the reason why they must say that when
we count thus-'1,2'-we do not proceed by adding to the given number;
for if we do, neither will the numbers be generated from the indefinite
dyad, nor can a number be an Idea; for then one Idea will be in another,
and all Forms will be parts of one Form. And so with a view to their
hypothesis their statements are right, but as a whole they are wrong;
for their view is very destructive, since they will admit that this
question itself affords some difficulty-whether, when we count and
say -1,2,3-we count by addition or by separate portions. But we do
both; and so it is absurd to reason back from this problem to so great
a difference of essence. 

Part 8 "

"First of all it is well to determine what is the differentia of a
number-and of a unit, if it has a differentia. Units must differ either
in quantity or in quality; and neither of these seems to be possible.
But number qua number differs in quantity. And if the units also did
differ in quantity, number would differ from number, though equal
in number of units. Again, are the first units greater or smaller,
and do the later ones increase or diminish? All these are irrational
suppositions. But neither can they differ in quality. For no attribute
can attach to them; for even to numbers quality is said to belong
after quantity. Again, quality could not come to them either from
the 1 or the dyad; for the former has no quality, and the latter gives
quantity; for this entity is what makes things to be many. If the
facts are really otherwise, they should state this quite at the beginning
and determine if possible, regarding the differentia of the unit,
why it must exist, and, failing this, what differentia they mean.

"Evidently then, if the Ideas are numbers, the units cannot all be
associable, nor can they be inassociable in either of the two ways.
But neither is the way in which some others speak about numbers correct.
These are those who do not think there are Ideas, either without qualification
or as identified with certain numbers, but think the objects of mathematics
exist and the numbers are the first of existing things, and the 1-itself
is the starting-point of them. It is paradoxical that there should
be a 1 which is first of 1's, as they say, but not a 2 which is first
of 2's, nor a 3 of 3's; for the same reasoning applies to all. If,
then, the facts with regard to number are so, and one supposes mathematical
number alone to exist, the 1 is not the starting-point (for this sort
of 1 must differ from the-other units; and if this is so, there must
also be a 2 which is first of 2's, and similarly with the other successive
numbers). But if the 1 is the starting-point, the truth about the
numbers must rather be what Plato used to say, and there must be a
first 2 and 3 and numbers must not be associable with one another.
But if on the other hand one supposes this, many impossible results,
as we have said, follow. But either this or the other must be the
case, so that if neither is, number cannot exist separately.

"It is evident, also, from this that the third version is the worst,-the
view ideal and mathematical number is the same. For two mistakes must
then meet in the one opinion. (1) Mathematical number cannot be of
this sort, but the holder of this view has to spin it out by making
suppositions peculiar to himself. And (2) he must also admit all the
consequences that confront those who speak of number in the sense
of 'Forms'. 

"The Pythagorean version in one way affords fewer difficulties than
those before named, but in another way has others peculiar to itself.
For not thinking of number as capable of existing separately removes
many of the impossible consequences; but that bodies should be composed
of numbers, and that this should be mathematical number, is impossible.
For it is not true to speak of indivisible spatial magnitudes; and
however much there might be magnitudes of this sort, units at least
have not magnitude; and how can a magnitude be composed of indivisibles?
But arithmetical number, at least, consists of units, while these
thinkers identify number with real things; at any rate they apply
their propositions to bodies as if they consisted of those numbers.

"If, then, it is necessary, if number is a self-subsistent real thing,
that it should exist in one of these ways which have been mentioned,
and if it cannot exist in any of these, evidently number has no such
nature as those who make it separable set up for it. 

"Again, does each unit come from the great and the small, equalized,
or one from the small, another from the great? (a) If the latter,
neither does each thing contain all the elements, nor are the units
without difference; for in one there is the great and in another the
small, which is contrary in its nature to the great. Again, how is
it with the units in the 3-itself? One of them is an odd unit. But
perhaps it is for this reason that they give 1-itself the middle place
in odd numbers. (b) But if each of the two units consists of both
the great and the small, equalized, how will the 2 which is a single
thing, consist of the great and the small? Or how will it differ from
the unit? Again, the unit is prior to the 2; for when it is destroyed
the 2 is destroyed. It must, then, be the Idea of an Idea since it
is prior to an Idea, and it must have come into being before it. From
what, then? Not from the indefinite dyad, for its function was to
double. 

"Again, number must be either infinite or finite; for these thinkers
think of number as capable of existing separately, so that it is not
possible that neither of those alternatives should be true. Clearly
it cannot be infinite; for infinite number is neither odd nor even,
but the generation of numbers is always the generation either of an
odd or of an even number; in one way, when 1 operates on an even number,
an odd number is produced; in another way, when 2 operates, the numbers
got from 1 by doubling are produced; in another way, when the odd
numbers operate, the other even numbers are produced. Again, if every
Idea is an Idea of something, and the numbers are Ideas, infinite
number itself will be an Idea of something, either of some sensible
thing or of something else. Yet this is not possible in view of their
thesis any more than it is reasonable in itself, at least if they
arrange the Ideas as they do. 

"But if number is finite, how far does it go? With regard to this
not only the fact but the reason should be stated. But if number goes
only up to 10 as some say, firstly the Forms will soon run short;
e.g. if 3 is man-himself, what number will be the horse-itself? The
series of the numbers which are the several things-themselves goes
up to 10. It must, then, be one of the numbers within these limits;
for it is these that are substances and Ideas. Yet they will run short;
for the various forms of animal will outnumber them. At the same time
it is clear that if in this way the 3 is man-himself, the other 3's
are so also (for those in identical numbers are similar), so that
there will be an infinite number of men; if each 3 is an Idea, each
of the numbers will be man-himself, and if not, they will at least
be men. And if the smaller number is part of the greater (being number
of such a sort that the units in the same number are associable),
then if the 4-itself is an Idea of something, e.g. of 'horse' or of
'white', man will be a part of horse, if man is It is paradoxical
also that there should be an Idea of 10 but not of 11, nor of the
succeeding numbers. Again, there both are and come to be certain things
of which there are no Forms; why, then, are there not Forms of them
also? We infer that the Forms are not causes. Again, it is paradoxical-if
the number series up to 10 is more of a real thing and a Form than
10 itself. There is no generation of the former as one thing, and
there is of the latter. But they try to work on the assumption that
the series of numbers up to 10 is a complete series. At least they
generate the derivatives-e.g. the void, proportion, the odd, and the
others of this kind-within the decade. For some things, e.g. movement
and rest, good and bad, they assign to the originative principles,
and the others to the numbers. This is why they identify the odd with
1; for if the odd implied 3 how would 5 be odd? Again, spatial magnitudes
and all such things are explained without going beyond a definite
number; e.g. the first, the indivisible, line, then the 2 &c.; these
entities also extend only up to 10. 

"Again, if number can exist separately, one might ask which is prior-
1, or 3 or 2? Inasmuch as the number is composite, 1 is prior, but
inasmuch as the universal and the form is prior, the number is prior;
for each of the units is part of the number as its matter, and the
number acts as form. And in a sense the right angle is prior to the
acute, because it is determinate and in virtue of its definition;
but in a sense the acute is prior, because it is a part and the right
angle is divided into acute angles. As matter, then, the acute angle
and the element and the unit are prior, but in respect of the form
and of the substance as expressed in the definition, the right angle,
and the whole consisting of the matter and the form, are prior; for
the concrete thing is nearer to the form and to what is expressed
in the definition, though in generation it is later. How then is 1
the starting-point? Because it is not divisiable, they say; but both
the universal, and the particular or the element, are indivisible.
But they are starting-points in different ways, one in definition
and the other in time. In which way, then, is 1 the starting-point?
As has been said, the right angle is thought to be prior to the acute,
and the acute to the right, and each is one. Accordingly they make
1 the starting-point in both ways. But this is impossible. For the
universal is one as form or substance, while the element is one as
a part or as matter. For each of the two is in a sense one-in truth
each of the two units exists potentially (at least if the number is
a unity and not like a heap, i.e. if different numbers consist of
differentiated units, as they say), but not in complete reality; and
the cause of the error they fell into is that they were conducting
their inquiry at the same time from the standpoint of mathematics
and from that of universal definitions, so that (1) from the former
standpoint they treated unity, their first principle, as a point;
for the unit is a point without position. They put things together
out of the smallest parts, as some others also have done. Therefore
the unit becomes the matter of numbers and at the same time prior
to 2; and again posterior, 2 being treated as a whole, a unity, and
a form. But (2) because they were seeking the universal they treated
the unity which can be predicated of a number, as in this sense also
a part of the number. But these characteristics cannot belong at the
same time to the same thing. 

"If the 1-itself must be unitary (for it differs in nothing from other
1's except that it is the starting-point), and the 2 is divisible
but the unit is not, the unit must be liker the 1-itself than the
2 is. But if the unit is liker it, it must be liker to the unit than
to the 2; therefore each of the units in 2 must be prior to the 2.
But they deny this; at least they generate the 2 first. Again, if
the 2-itself is a unity and the 3-itself is one also, both form a
2. From what, then, is this 2 produced? 

Part 9 

"Since there is not contact in numbers, but succession, viz. between
the units between which there is nothing, e.g. between those in 2
or in 3 one might ask whether these succeed the 1-itself or not, and
whether, of the terms that succeed it, 2 or either of the units in
2 is prior. 

"Similar difficulties occur with regard to the classes of things posterior
to number,-the line, the plane, and the solid. For some construct
these out of the species of the 'great and small'; e.g. lines from
the 'long and short', planes from the 'broad and narrow', masses from
the 'deep and shallow'; which are species of the 'great and small'.
And the originative principle of such things which answers to the
1 different thinkers describe in different ways, And in these also
the impossibilities, the fictions, and the contradictions of all probability
are seen to be innumerable. For (i) geometrical classes are severed
from one another, unless the principles of these are implied in one
another in such a way that the 'broad and narrow' is also 'long and
short' (but if this is so, the plane will be line and the solid a
plane; again, how will angles and figures and such things be explained?).
And (ii) the same happens as in regard to number; for 'long and short',
&c., are attributes of magnitude, but magnitude does not consist of
these, any more than the line consists of 'straight and curved', or
solids of 'smooth and rough'. 

"(All these views share a difficulty which occurs with regard to species-of-a-genus,
when one posits the universals, viz. whether it is animal-itself or
something other than animal-itself that is in the particular animal.
True, if the universal is not separable from sensible things, this
will present no difficulty; but if the 1 and the numbers are separable,
as those who express these views say, it is not easy to solve the
difficulty, if one may apply the words 'not easy' to the impossible.
For when we apprehend the unity in 2, or in general in a number, do
we apprehend a thing-itself or something else?). 

"Some, then, generate spatial magnitudes from matter of this sort,
others from the point -and the point is thought by them to be not
1 but something like 1-and from other matter like plurality, but not
identical with it; about which principles none the less the same difficulties
occur. For if the matter is one, line and plane-and soli will be the
same; for from the same elements will come one and the same thing.
But if the matters are more than one, and there is one for the line
and a second for the plane and another for the solid, they either
are implied in one another or not, so that the same results will follow
even so; for either the plane will not contain a line or it will he
a line. 

"Again, how number can consist of the one and plurality, they make
no attempt to explain; but however they express themselves, the same
objections arise as confront those who construct number out of the
one and the indefinite dyad. For the one view generates number from
the universally predicated plurality, and not from a particular plurality;
and the other generates it from a particular plurality, but the first;
for 2 is said to be a 'first plurality'. Therefore there is practically
no difference, but the same difficulties will follow,-is it intermixture
or position or blending or generation? and so on. Above all one might
press the question 'if each unit is one, what does it come from?'
Certainly each is not the one-itself. It must, then, come from the
one itself and plurality, or a part of plurality. To say that the
unit is a plurality is impossible, for it is indivisible; and to generate
it from a part of plurality involves many other objections; for (a)
each of the parts must be indivisible (or it will be a plurality and
the unit will be divisible) and the elements will not be the one and
plurality; for the single units do not come from plurality and the
one. Again, (,the holder of this view does nothing but presuppose
another number; for his plurality of indivisibles is a number. Again,
we must inquire, in view of this theory also, whether the number is
infinite or finite. For there was at first, as it seems, a plurality
that was itself finite, from which and from the one comes the finite
number of units. And there is another plurality that is plurality-itself
and infinite plurality; which sort of plurality, then, is the element
which co-operates with the one? One might inquire similarly about
the point, i.e. the element out of which they make spatial magnitudes.
For surely this is not the one and only point; at any rate, then,
let them say out of what each of the points is formed. Certainly not
of some distance + the point-itself. Nor again can there be indivisible
parts of a distance, as the elements out of which the units are said
to be made are indivisible parts of plurality; for number consists
of indivisibles, but spatial magnitudes do not. 

"All these objections, then, and others of the sort make it evident
that number and spatial magnitudes cannot exist apart from things.
Again, the discord about numbers between the various versions is a
sign that it is the incorrectness of the alleged facts themselves
that brings confusion into the theories. For those who make the objects
of mathematics alone exist apart from sensible things, seeing the
difficulty about the Forms and their fictitiousness, abandoned ideal
number and posited mathematical. But those who wished to make the
Forms at the same time also numbers, but did not see, if one assumed
these principles, how mathematical number was to exist apart from
ideal, made ideal and mathematical number the same-in words, since
in fact mathematical number has been destroyed; for they state hypotheses
peculiar to themselves and not those of mathematics. And he who first
supposed that the Forms exist and that the Forms are numbers and that
the objects of mathematics exist, naturally separated the two. Therefore
it turns out that all of them are right in some respect, but on the
whole not right. And they themselves confirm this, for their statements
do not agree but conflict. The cause is that their hypotheses and
their principles are false. And it is hard to make a good case out
of bad materials, according to Epicharmus: 'as soon as 'tis said,
'tis seen to be wrong.' 

"But regarding numbers the questions we have raised and the conclusions
we have reached are sufficient (for while he who is already convinced
might be further convinced by a longer discussion, one not yet convinced
would not come any nearer to conviction); regarding the first principles
and the first causes and elements, the views expressed by those who
discuss only sensible substance have been partly stated in our works
on nature, and partly do not belong to the present inquiry; but the
views of those who assert that there are other substances besides
the sensible must be considered next after those we have been mentioning.
Since, then, some say that the Ideas and the numbers are such substances,
and that the elements of these are elements and principles of real
things, we must inquire regarding these what they say and in what
sense they say it. 

"Those who posit numbers only, and these mathematical, must be considered
later; but as regards those who believe in the Ideas one might survey
at the same time their way of thinking and the difficulty into which
they fall. For they at the same time make the Ideas universal and
again treat them as separable and as individuals. That this is not
possible has been argued before. The reason why those who described
their substances as universal combined these two characteristics in
one thing, is that they did not make substances identical with sensible
things. They thought that the particulars in the sensible world were
a state of flux and none of them remained, but that the universal
was apart from these and something different. And Socrates gave the
impulse to this theory, as we said in our earlier discussion, by reason
of his definitions, but he did not separate universals from individuals;
and in this he thought rightly, in not separating them. This is plain
from the results; for without the universal it is not possible to
get knowledge, but the separation is the cause of the objections that
arise with regard to the Ideas. His successors, however, treating
it as necessary, if there are to be any substances besides the sensible
and transient substances, that they must be separable, had no others,
but gave separate existence to these universally predicated substances,
so that it followed that universals and individuals were almost the
same sort of thing. This in itself, then, would be one difficulty
in the view we have mentioned. 

Part 10 "

"Let us now mention a point which presents a certain difficulty both
to those who believe in the Ideas and to those who do not, and which
was stated before, at the beginning, among the problems. If we do
not suppose substances to be separate, and in the way in which individual
things are said to be separate, we shall destroy substance in the
sense in which we understand 'substance'; but if we conceive substances
to be separable, how are we to conceive their elements and their principles?

"If they are individual and not universal, (a) real things will be
just of the same number as the elements, and (b) the elements will
not be knowable. For (a) let the syllables in speech be substances,
and their elements elements of substances; then there must be only
one 'ba' and one of each of the syllables, since they are not universal
and the same in form but each is one in number and a 'this' and not
a kind possessed of a common name (and again they suppose that the
'just what a thing is' is in each case one). And if the syllables
are unique, so too are the parts of which they consist; there will
not, then, be more a's than one, nor more than one of any of the other
elements, on the same principle on which an identical syllable cannot
exist in the plural number. But if this is so, there will not be other
things existing besides the elements, but only the elements.

"(b) Again, the elements will not be even knowable; for they are not
universal, and knowledge is of universals. This is clear from demonstrations
and from definitions; for we do not conclude that this triangle has
its angles equal to two right angles, unless every triangle has its
angles equal to two right angles, nor that this man is an animal,
unless every man is an animal. 

"But if the principles are universal, either the substances composed
of them are also universal, or non-substance will be prior to substance;
for the universal is not a substance, but the element or principle
is universal, and the element or principle is prior to the things
of which it is the principle or element. 

"All these difficulties follow naturally, when they make the Ideas
out of elements and at the same time claim that apart from the substances
which have the same form there are Ideas, a single separate entity.
But if, e.g. in the case of the elements of speech, the a's and the
b's may quite well be many and there need be no a-itself and b-itself
besides the many, there may be, so far as this goes, an infinite number
of similar syllables. The statement that an knowledge is universal,
so that the principles of things must also be universal and not separate
substances, presents indeed, of all the points we have mentioned,
the greatest difficulty, but yet the statement is in a sense true,
although in a sense it is not. For knowledge, like the verb 'to know',
means two things, of which one is potential and one actual. The potency,
being, as matter, universal and indefinite, deals with the universal
and indefinite; but the actuality, being definite, deals with a definite
object, being a 'this', it deals with a 'this'. But per accidens sight
sees universal colour, because this individual colour which it sees
is colour; and this individual a which the grammarian investigates
is an a. For if the principles must be universal, what is derived
from them must also be universal, as in demonstrations; and if this
is so, there will be nothing capable of separate existence-i.e. no
substance. But evidently in a sense knowledge is universal, and in
a sense it is not. 



BOOK XIV

Part 1 

"

"REGARDING this kind of substance, what we have said must be taken
as sufficient. All philosophers make the first principles contraries:
as in natural things, so also in the case of unchangeable substances.
But since there cannot be anything prior to the first principle of
all things, the principle cannot be the principle and yet be an attribute
of something else. To suggest this is like saying that the white is
a first principle, not qua anything else but qua white, but yet that
it is predicable of a subject, i.e. that its being white presupposes
its being something else; this is absurd, for then that subject will
be prior. But all things which are generated from their contraries
involve an underlying subject; a subject, then, must be present in
the case of contraries, if anywhere. All contraries, then, are always
predicable of a subject, and none can exist apart, but just as appearances
suggest that there is nothing contrary to substance, argument confirms
this. No contrary, then, is the first principle of all things in the
full sense; the first principle is something different. 

"But these thinkers make one of the contraries matter, some making
the unequal which they take to be the essence of plurality-matter
for the One, and others making plurality matter for the One. (The
former generate numbers out of the dyad of the unequal, i.e. of the
great and small, and the other thinker we have referred to generates
them out of plurality, while according to both it is generated by
the essence of the One.) For even the philosopher who says the unequal
and the One are the elements, and the unequal is a dyad composed of
the great and small, treats the unequal, or the great and the small,
as being one, and does not draw the distinction that they are one
in definition, but not in number. But they do not describe rightly
even the principles which they call elements, for some name the great
and the small with the One and treat these three as elements of numbers,
two being matter, one the form; while others name the many and few,
because the great and the small are more appropriate in their nature
to magnitude than to number; and others name rather the universal
character common to these-'that which exceeds and that which is exceeded'.
None of these varieties of opinion makes any difference to speak of,
in view of some of the consequences; they affect only the abstract
objections, which these thinkers take care to avoid because the demonstrations
they themselves offer are abstract,-with this exception, that if the
exceeding and the exceeded are the principles, and not the great and
the small, consistency requires that number should come from the elements
before does; for number is more universal than as the exceeding and
the exceeded are more universal than the great and the small. But
as it is, they say one of these things but do not say the other. Others
oppose the different and the other to the One, and others oppose plurality
to the One. But if, as they claim, things consist of contraries, and
to the One either there is nothing contrary, or if there is to be
anything it is plurality, and the unequal is contrary to the equal,
and the different to the same, and the other to the thing itself,
those who oppose the One to plurality have most claim to plausibility,
but even their view is inadequate, for the One would on their view
be a few; for plurality is opposed to fewness, and the many to the
few. 

"'The one' evidently means a measure. And in every case there is some
underlying thing with a distinct nature of its own, e.g. in the scale
a quarter-tone, in spatial magnitude a finger or a foot or something
of the sort, in rhythms a beat or a syllable; and similarly in gravity
it is a definite weight; and in the same way in all cases, in qualities
a quality, in quantities a quantity (and the measure is indivisible,
in the former case in kind, and in the latter to the sense); which
implies that the one is not in itself the substance of anything. And
this is reasonable; for 'the one' means the measure of some plurality,
and 'number' means a measured plurality and a plurality of measures.
(Thus it is natural that one is not a number; for the measure is not
measures, but both the measure and the one are starting-points.) The
measure must always be some identical thing predicable of all the
things it measures, e.g. if the things are horses, the measure is
'horse', and if they are men, 'man'. If they are a man, a horse, and
a god, the measure is perhaps 'living being', and the number of them
will be a number of living beings. If the things are 'man' and 'pale'
and 'walking', these will scarcely have a number, because all belong
to a subject which is one and the same in number, yet the number of
these will be a number of 'kinds' or of some such term. 

"Those who treat the unequal as one thing, and the dyad as an indefinite
compound of great and small, say what is very far from being probable
or possible. For (a) these are modifications and accidents, rather
than substrata, of numbers and magnitudes-the many and few of number,
and the great and small of magnitude-like even and odd, smooth and
rough, straight and curved. Again, (b) apart from this mistake, the
great and the small, and so on, must be relative to something; but
what is relative is least of all things a kind of entity or substance,
and is posterior to quality and quantity; and the relative is an accident
of quantity, as was said, not its matter, since something with a distinct
nature of its own must serve as matter both to the relative in general
and to its parts and kinds. For there is nothing either great or small,
many or few, or, in general, relative to something else, which without
having a nature of its own is many or few, great or small, or relative
to something else. A sign that the relative is least of all a substance
and a real thing is the fact that it alone has no proper generation
or destruction or movement, as in respect of quantity there is increase
and diminution, in respect of quality alteration, in respect of place
locomotion, in respect of substance simple generation and destruction.
In respect of relation there is no proper change; for, without changing,
a thing will be now greater and now less or equal, if that with which
it is compared has changed in quantity. And (c) the matter of each
thing, and therefore of substance, must be that which is potentially
of the nature in question; but the relative is neither potentially
nor actually substance. It is strange, then, or rather impossible,
to make not-substance an element in, and prior to, substance; for
all the categories are posterior to substance. Again, (d) elements
are not predicated of the things of which they are elements, but many
and few are predicated both apart and together of number, and long
and short of the line, and both broad and narrow apply to the plane.
If there is a plurality, then, of which the one term, viz. few, is
always predicated, e.g. 2 (which cannot be many, for if it were many,
1 would be few), there must be also one which is absolutely many,
e.g. 10 is many (if there is no number which is greater than 10),
or 10,000. How then, in view of this, can number consist of few and
many? Either both ought to be predicated of it, or neither; but in
fact only the one or the other is predicated. 

Part 2 "

"We must inquire generally, whether eternal things can consist of
elements. If they do, they will have matter; for everything that consists
of elements is composite. Since, then, even if a thing exists for
ever, out of that of which it consists it would necessarily also,
if it had come into being, have come into being, and since everything
comes to be what it comes to be out of that which is it potentially
(for it could not have come to be out of that which had not this capacity,
nor could it consist of such elements), and since the potential can
be either actual or not,-this being so, however everlasting number
or anything else that has matter is, it must be capable of not existing,
just as that which is any number of years old is as capable of not
existing as that which is a day old; if this is capable of not existing,
so is that which has lasted for a time so long that it has no limit.
They cannot, then, be eternal, since that which is capable of not
existing is not eternal, as we had occasion to show in another context.
If that which we are now saying is true universally-that no substance
is eternal unless it is actuality-and if the elements are matter that
underlies substance, no eternal substance can have elements present
in it, of which it consists. 

"There are some who describe the element which acts with the One as
an indefinite dyad, and object to 'the unequal', reasonably enough,
because of the ensuing difficulties; but they have got rid only of
those objections which inevitably arise from the treatment of the
unequal, i.e. the relative, as an element; those which arise apart
from this opinion must confront even these thinkers, whether it is
ideal number, or mathematical, that they construct out of those elements.

"There are many causes which led them off into these explanations,
and especially the fact that they framed the difficulty in an obsolete
form. For they thought that all things that are would be one (viz.
Being itself), if one did not join issue with and refute the saying
of Parmenides: "

"'For never will this he proved, that things that are not are.'
"

"They thought it necessary to prove that that which is not is; for
only thus-of that which is and something else-could the things that
are be composed, if they are many. 

"But, first, if 'being' has many senses (for it means sometimes substance,
sometimes that it is of a certain quality, sometimes that it is of
a certain quantity, and at other times the other categories), what
sort of 'one', then, are all the things that are, if non-being is
to be supposed not to be? Is it the substances that are one, or the
affections and similarly the other categories as well, or all together-so
that the 'this' and the 'such' and the 'so much' and the other categories
that indicate each some one class of being will all be one? But it
is strange, or rather impossible, that the coming into play of a single
thing should bring it about that part of that which is is a 'this',
part a 'such', part a 'so much', part a 'here'. 

"Secondly, of what sort of non-being and being do the things that
are consist? For 'nonbeing' also has many senses, since 'being' has;
and 'not being a man' means not being a certain substance, 'not being
straight' not being of a certain quality, 'not being three cubits
long' not being of a certain quantity. What sort of being and non-being,
then, by their union pluralize the things that are? This thinker means
by the non-being the union of which with being pluralizes the things
that are, the false and the character of falsity. This is also why
it used to be said that we must assume something that is false, as
geometers assume the line which is not a foot long to be a foot long.
But this cannot be so. For neither do geometers assume anything false
(for the enunciation is extraneous to the inference), nor is it non-being
in this sense that the things that are are generated from or resolved
into. But since 'non-being' taken in its various cases has as many
senses as there are categories, and besides this the false is said
not to be, and so is the potential, it is from this that generation
proceeds, man from that which is not man but potentially man, and
white from that which is not white but potentially white, and this
whether it is some one thing that is generated or many. 

"The question evidently is, how being, in the sense of 'the substances',
is many; for the things that are generated are numbers and lines and
bodies. Now it is strange to inquire how being in the sense of the
'what' is many, and not how either qualities or quantities are many.
For surely the indefinite dyad or 'the great and the small' is not
a reason why there should be two kinds of white or many colours or
flavours or shapes; for then these also would be numbers and units.
But if they had attacked these other categories, they would have seen
the cause of the plurality in substances also; for the same thing
or something analogous is the cause. This aberration is the reason
also why in seeking the opposite of being and the one, from which
with being and the one the things that are proceed, they posited the
relative term (i.e. the unequal), which is neither the contrary nor
the contradictory of these, and is one kind of being as 'what' and
quality also are. 

"They should have asked this question also, how relative terms are
many and not one. But as it is, they inquire how there are many units
besides the first 1, but do not go on to inquire how there are many
unequals besides the unequal. Yet they use them and speak of great
and small, many and few (from which proceed numbers), long and short
(from which proceeds the line), broad and narrow (from which proceeds
the plane), deep and shallow (from which proceed solids); and they
speak of yet more kinds of relative term. What is the reason, then,
why there is a plurality of these? 

"It is necessary, then, as we say, to presuppose for each thing that
which is it potentially; and the holder of these views further declared
what that is which is potentially a 'this' and a substance but is
not in itself being-viz. that it is the relative (as if he had said
'the qualitative'), which is neither potentially the one or being,
nor the negation of the one nor of being, but one among beings. And
it was much more necessary, as we said, if he was inquiring how beings
are many, not to inquire about those in the same category-how there
are many substances or many qualities-but how beings as a whole are
many; for some are substances, some modifications, some relations.
In the categories other than substance there is yet another problem
involved in the existence of plurality. Since they are not separable
from substances, qualities and quantities are many just because their
substratum becomes and is many; yet there ought to be a matter for
each category; only it cannot be separable from substances. But in
the case of 'thises', it is possible to explain how the 'this' is
many things, unless a thing is to be treated as both a 'this' and
a general character. The difficulty arising from the facts about substances
is rather this, how there are actually many substances and not one.

"But further, if the 'this' and the quantitative are not the same,
we are not told how and why the things that are are many, but how
quantities are many. For all 'number' means a quantity, and so does
the 'unit', unless it means a measure or the quantitatively indivisible.
If, then, the quantitative and the 'what' are different, we are not
told whence or how the 'what' is many; but if any one says they are
the same, he has to face many inconsistencies. 

"One might fix one's attention also on the question, regarding the
numbers, what justifies the belief that they exist. To the believer
in Ideas they provide some sort of cause for existing things, since
each number is an Idea, and the Idea is to other things somehow or
other the cause of their being; for let this supposition be granted
them. But as for him who does not hold this view because he sees the
inherent objections to the Ideas (so that it is not for this reason
that he posits numbers), but who posits mathematical number, why must
we believe his statement that such number exists, and of what use
is such number to other things? Neither does he who says it exists
maintain that it is the cause of anything (he rather says it is a
thing existing by itself), nor is it observed to be the cause of anything;
for the theorems of arithmeticians will all be found true even of
sensible things, as was said before. 

Part 3 "

"As for those, then, who suppose the Ideas to exist and to be numbers,
by their assumption in virtue of the method of setting out each term
apart from its instances-of the unity of each general term they try
at least to explain somehow why number must exist. Since their reasons,
however, are neither conclusive nor in themselves possible, one must
not, for these reasons at least, assert the existence of number. Again,
the Pythagoreans, because they saw many attributes of numbers belonging
te sensible bodies, supposed real things to be numbers-not separable
numbers, however, but numbers of which real things consist. But why?
Because the attributes of numbers are present in a musical scale and
in the heavens and in many other things. Those, however, who say that
mathematical number alone exists cannot according to their hypotheses
say anything of this sort, but it used to be urged that these sensible
things could not be the subject of the sciences. But we maintain that
they are, as we said before. And it is evident that the objects of
mathematics do not exist apart; for if they existed apart their attributes
would not have been present in bodies. Now the Pythagoreans in this
point are open to no objection; but in that they construct natural
bodies out of numbers, things that have lightness and weight out of
things that have not weight or lightness, they seem to speak of another
heaven and other bodies, not of the sensible. But those who make number
separable assume that it both exists and is separable because the
axioms would not be true of sensible things, while the statements
of mathematics are true and 'greet the soul'; and similarly with the
spatial magnitudes of mathematics. It is evident, then, both that
the rival theory will say the contrary of this, and that the difficulty
we raised just now, why if numbers are in no way present in sensible
things their attributes are present in sensible things, has to be
solved by those who hold these views. 

"There are some who, because the point is the limit and extreme of
the line, the line of the plane, and the plane of the solid, think
there must be real things of this sort. We must therefore examine
this argument too, and see whether it is not remarkably weak. For
(i) extremes are not substances, but rather all these things are limits.
For even walking, and movement in general, has a limit, so that on
their theory this will be a 'this' and a substance. But that is absurd.
Not but what (ii) even if they are substances, they will all be the
substances of the sensible things in this world; for it is to these
that the argument applied. Why then should they be capable of existing
apart? 

"Again, if we are not too easily satisfied, we may, regarding all
number and the objects of mathematics, press this difficulty, that
they contribute nothing to one another, the prior to the posterior;
for if number did not exist, none the less spatial magnitudes would
exist for those who maintain the existence of the objects of mathematics
only, and if spatial magnitudes did not exist, soul and sensible bodies
would exist. But the observed facts show that nature is not a series
of episodes, like a bad tragedy. As for the believers in the Ideas,
this difficulty misses them; for they construct spatial magnitudes
out of matter and number, lines out of the number planes doubtless
out of solids out of or they use other numbers, which makes no difference.
But will these magnitudes be Ideas, or what is their manner of existence,
and what do they contribute to things? These contribute nothing, as
the objects of mathematics contribute nothing. But not even is any
theorem true of them, unless we want to change the objects of mathematics
and invent doctrines of our own. But it is not hard to assume any
random hypotheses and spin out a long string of conclusions. These
thinkers, then, are wrong in this way, in wanting to unite the objects
of mathematics with the Ideas. And those who first posited two kinds
of number, that of the Forms and that which is mathematical, neither
have said nor can say how mathematical number is to exist and of what
it is to consist. For they place it between ideal and sensible number.
If (i) it consists of the great and small, it will be the same as
the other-ideal-number (he makes spatial magnitudes out of some other
small and great). And if (ii) he names some other element, he will
be making his elements rather many. And if the principle of each of
the two kinds of number is a 1, unity will be something common to
these, and we must inquire how the one is these many things, while
at the same time number, according to him, cannot be generated except
from one and an indefinite dyad. 

"All this is absurd, and conflicts both with itself and with the probabilities,
and we seem to see in it Simonides 'long rigmarole' for the long rigmarole
comes into play, like those of slaves, when men have nothing sound
to say. And the very elements-the great and the small-seem to cry
out against the violence that is done to them; for they cannot in
any way generate numbers other than those got from 1 by doubling.

"It is strange also to attribute generation to things that are eternal,
or rather this is one of the things that are impossible. There need
be no doubt whether the Pythagoreans attribute generation to them
or not; for they say plainly that when the one had been constructed,
whether out of planes or of surface or of seed or of elements which
they cannot express, immediately the nearest part of the unlimited
began to be constrained and limited by the limit. But since they are
constructing a world and wish to speak the language of natural science,
it is fair to make some examination of their physical theorics, but
to let them off from the present inquiry; for we are investigating
the principles at work in unchangeable things, so that it is numbers
of this kind whose genesis we must study. 

Part 4 

"These thinkers say there is no generation of the odd number, which
evidently implies that there is generation of the even; and some present
the even as produced first from unequals-the great and the small-when
these are equalized. The inequality, then, must belong to them before
they are equalized. If they had always been equalized, they would
not have been unequal before; for there is nothing before that which
is always. Therefore evidently they are not giving their account of
the generation of numbers merely to assist contemplation of their
nature. 

"A difficulty, and a reproach to any one who finds it no difficulty,
are contained in the question how the elements and the principles
are related to the good and the beautiful; the difficulty is this,
whether any of the elements is such a thing as we mean by the good
itself and the best, or this is not so, but these are later in origin
than the elements. The theologians seem to agree with some thinkers
of the present day, who answer the question in the negative, and say
that both the good and the beautiful appear in the nature of things
only when that nature has made some progress. (This they do to avoid
a real objection which confronts those who say, as some do, that the
one is a first principle. The objection arises not from their ascribing
goodness to the first principle as an attribute, but from their making
the one a principle-and a principle in the sense of an element-and
generating number from the one.) The old poets agree with this inasmuch
as they say that not those who are first in time, e.g. Night and Heaven
or Chaos or Ocean, reign and rule, but Zeus. These poets, however,
are led to speak thus only because they think of the rulers of the
world as changing; for those of them who combine the two characters
in that they do not use mythical language throughout, e.g. Pherecydes
and some others, make the original generating agent the Best, and
so do the Magi, and some of the later sages also, e.g. both Empedocles
and Anaxagoras, of whom one made love an element, and the other made
reason a principle. Of those who maintain the existence of the unchangeable
substances some say the One itself is the good itself; but they thought
its substance lay mainly in its unity. 

"This, then, is the problem,-which of the two ways of speaking is
right. It would be strange if to that which is primary and eternal
and most self-sufficient this very quality--self-sufficiency and self-maintenance--belongs
primarily in some other way than as a good. But indeed it can be for
no other reason indestructible or self-sufficient than because its
nature is good. Therefore to say that the first principle is good
is probably correct; but that this principle should be the One or,
if not that, at least an element, and an element of numbers, is impossible.
Powerful objections arise, to avoid which some have given up the theory
(viz. those who agree that the One is a first principle and element,
but only of mathematical number). For on this view all the units become
identical with species of good, and there is a great profusion of
goods. Again, if the Forms are numbers, all the Forms are identical
with species of good. But let a man assume Ideas of anything he pleases.
If these are Ideas only of goods, the Ideas will not be substances;
but if the Ideas are also Ideas of substances, all animals and plants
and all individuals that share in Ideas will be good. 

"These absurdities follow, and it also follows that the contrary element,
whether it is plurality or the unequal, i.e. the great and small,
is the bad-itself. (Hence one thinker avoided attaching the good to
the One, because it would necessarily follow, since generation is
from contraries, that badness is the fundamental nature of plurality;
while others say inequality is the nature of the bad.) It follows,
then, that all things partake of the bad except one--the One itself,
and that numbers partake of it in a more undiluted form than spatial
magnitudes, and that the bad is the space in which the good is realized,
and that it partakes in and desires that which tends to destroy it;
for contrary tends to destroy contrary. And if, as we were saying,
the matter is that which is potentially each thing, e.g. that of actual
fire is that which is potentially fire, the bad will be just the potentially
good. 

"All these objections, then, follow, partly because they make every
principle an element, partly because they make contraries principles,
partly because they make the One a principle, partly because they
treat the numbers as the first substances, and as capable of existing
apart, and as Forms. 

Part 5 "

"If, then, it is equally impossible not to put the good among the
first principles and to put it among them in this way, evidently the
principles are not being correctly described, nor are the first substances.
Nor does any one conceive the matter correctly if he compares the
principles of the universe to that of animals and plants, on the ground
that the more complete always comes from the indefinite and incomplete-which
is what leads this thinker to say that this is also true of the first
principles of reality, so that the One itself is not even an existing
thing. This is incorrect, for even in this world of animals and plants
the principles from which these come are complete; for it is a man
that produces a man, and the seed is not first. 

"It is out of place, also, to generate place simultaneously with the
mathematical solids (for place is peculiar to the individual things,
and hence they are separate in place; but mathematical objects are
nowhere), and to say that they must be somewhere, but not say what
kind of thing their place is. 

"Those who say that existing things come from elements and that the
first of existing things are the numbers, should have first distinguished
the senses in which one thing comes from another, and then said in
which sense number comes from its first principles. 

"By intermixture? But (1) not everything is capable of intermixture,
and (2) that which is produced by it is different from its elements,
and on this view the one will not remain separate or a distinct entity;
but they want it to be so. 

"By juxtaposition, like a syllable? But then (1) the elements must
have position; and (2) he who thinks of number will be able to think
of the unity and the plurality apart; number then will be this-a unit
and plurality, or the one and the unequal. 

"Again, coming from certain things means in one sense that these are
still to be found in the product, and in another that they are not;
which sense does number come from these elements? Only things that
are generated can come from elements which are present in them. Does
number come, then, from its elements as from seed? But nothing can
be excreted from that which is indivisible. Does it come from its
contrary, its contrary not persisting? But all things that come in
this way come also from something else which does persist. Since,
then, one thinker places the 1 as contrary to plurality, and another
places it as contrary to the unequal, treating the 1 as equal, number
must be being treated as coming from contraries. There is, then, something
else that persists, from which and from one contrary the compound
is or has come to be. Again, why in the world do the other things
that come from contraries, or that have contraries, perish (even when
all of the contrary is used to produce them), while number does not?
Nothing is said about this. Yet whether present or not present in
the compound the contrary destroys it, e.g. 'strife' destroys the
'mixture' (yet it should not; for it is not to that that is contrary).

"Once more, it has not been determined at all in which way numbers
are the causes of substances and of being-whether (1) as boundaries
(as points are of spatial magnitudes). This is how Eurytus decided
what was the number of what (e.g. one of man and another of horse),
viz. by imitating the figures of living things with pebbles, as some
people bring numbers into the forms of triangle and square. Or (2)
is it because harmony is a ratio of numbers, and so is man and everything
else? But how are the attributes-white and sweet and hot-numbers?
Evidently it is not the numbers that are the essence or the causes
of the form; for the ratio is the essence, while the number the causes
of the form; for the ratio is the essence, while the number is the
matter. E.g. the essence of flesh or bone is number only in this way,
'three parts of fire and two of earth'. And a number, whatever number
it is, is always a number of certain things, either of parts of fire
or earth or of units; but the essence is that there is so much of
one thing to so much of another in the mixture; and this is no longer
a number but a ratio of mixture of numbers, whether these are corporeal
or of any other kind. 

"Number, then, whether it be number in general or the number which
consists of abstract units, is neither the cause as agent, nor the
matter, nor the ratio and form of things. Nor, of course, is it the
final cause. 

Part 6 "

"One might also raise the question what the good is that things get
from numbers because their composition is expressible by a number,
either by one which is easily calculable or by an odd number. For
in fact honey-water is no more wholesome if it is mixed in the proportion
of three times three, but it would do more good if it were in no particular
ratio but well diluted than if it were numerically expressible but
strong. Again, the ratios of mixtures are expressed by the adding
of numbers, not by mere numbers; e.g. it is 'three parts to two',
not 'three times two'. For in any multiplication the genus of the
things multiplied must be the same; therefore the product 1X2X3 must
be measurable by 1, and 4X5X6 by 4 and therefore all products into
which the same factor enters must be measurable by that factor. The
number of fire, then, cannot be 2X5X3X6 and at the same time that
of water 2X3. 

"If all things must share in number, it must follow that many things
are the same, and the same number must belong to one thing and to
another. Is number the cause, then, and does the thing exist because
of its number, or is this not certain? E.g. the motions of the sun
have a number, and again those of the moon,-yes, and the life and
prime of each animal. Why, then, should not some of these numbers
be squares, some cubes, and some equal, others double? There is no
reason why they should not, and indeed they must move within these
limits, since all things were assumed to share in number. And it was
assumed that things that differed might fall under the same number.
Therefore if the same number had belonged to certain things, these
would have been the same as one another, since they would have had
the same form of number; e.g. sun and moon would have been the same.
But why need these numbers be causes? There are seven vowels, the
scale consists of seven strings, the Pleiades are seven, at seven
animals lose their teeth (at least some do, though some do not), and
the champions who fought against Thebes were seven. Is it then because
the number is the kind of number it is, that the champions were seven
or the Pleiad consists of seven stars? Surely the champions were seven
because there were seven gates or for some other reason, and the Pleiad
we count as seven, as we count the Bear as twelve, while other peoples
count more stars in both. Nay they even say that X, Ps and Z are concords
and that because there are three concords, the double consonants also
are three. They quite neglect the fact that there might be a thousand
such letters; for one symbol might be assigned to GP. But if they
say that each of these three is equal to two of the other letters,
and no other is so, and if the cause is that there are three parts
of the mouth and one letter is in each applied to sigma, it is for
this reason that there are only three, not because the concords are
three; since as a matter of fact the concords are more than three,
but of double consonants there cannot be more. 

"These people are like the old-fashioned Homeric scholars, who see
small resemblances but neglect great ones. Some say that there are
many such cases, e.g. that the middle strings are represented by nine
and eight, and that the epic verse has seventeen syllables, which
is equal in number to the two strings, and that the scansion is, in
the right half of the line nine syllables, and in the left eight.
And they say that the distance in the letters from alpha to omega
is equal to that from the lowest note of the flute to the highest,
and that the number of this note is equal to that of the whole choir
of heaven. It may be suspected that no one could find difficulty either
in stating such analogies or in finding them in eternal things, since
they can be found even in perishable things. 

"But the lauded characteristics of numbers, and the contraries of
these, and generally the mathematical relations, as some describe
them, making them causes of nature, seem, when we inspect them in
this way, to vanish; for none of them is a cause in any of the senses
that have been distinguished in reference to the first principles.
In a sense, however, they make it plain that goodness belongs to numbers,
and that the odd, the straight, the square, the potencies of certain
numbers, are in the column of the beautiful. For the seasons and a
particular kind of number go together; and the other agreements that
they collect from the theorems of mathematics all have this meaning.
Hence they are like coincidences. For they are accidents, but the
things that agree are all appropriate to one another, and one by analogy.
For in each category of being an analogous term is found-as the straight
is in length, so is the level in surface, perhaps the odd in number,
and the white in colour. 

"Again, it is not the ideal numbers that are the causes of musical
phenomena and the like (for equal ideal numbers differ from one another
in form; for even the units do); so that we need not assume Ideas
for this reason at least. 

"These, then, are the results of the theory, and yet more might be
brought together. The fact that our opponnts have much trouble with
the generation of numbers and can in no way make a system of them,
seems to indicate that the objects of mathematics are not separable
from sensible things, as some say, and that they are not the first
principles. "

THE END

BOOK I

1 

Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and pursuit,
is thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly
been declared to be that at which all things aim. But a certain difference
is found among ends; some are activities, others are products apart
from the activities that produce them. Where there are ends apart
from the actions, it is the nature of the products to be better than
the activities. Now, as there are many actions, arts, and sciences,
their ends also are many; the end of the medical art is health, that
of shipbuilding a vessel, that of strategy victory, that of economics
wealth. But where such arts fall under a single capacity- as bridle-making
and the other arts concerned with the equipment of horses fall under
the art of riding, and this and every military action under strategy,
in the same way other arts fall under yet others- in all of these
the ends of the master arts are to be preferred to all the subordinate
ends; for it is for the sake of the former that the latter are pursued.
It makes no difference whether the activities themselves are the ends
of the actions, or something else apart from the activities, as in
the case of the sciences just mentioned. 

2 

If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire for
its own sake (everything else being desired for the sake of this),
and if we do not choose everything for the sake of something else
(for at that rate the process would go on to infinity, so that our
desire would be empty and vain), clearly this must be the good and
the chief good. Will not the knowledge of it, then, have a great influence
on life? Shall we not, like archers who have a mark to aim at, be
more likely to hit upon what is right? If so, we must try, in outline
at least, to determine what it is, and of which of the sciences or
capacities it is the object. It would seem to belong to the most authoritative
art and that which is most truly the master art. And politics appears
to be of this nature; for it is this that ordains which of the sciences
should be studied in a state, and which each class of citizens should
learn and up to what point they should learn them; and we see even
the most highly esteemed of capacities to fall under this, e.g. strategy,
economics, rhetoric; now, since politics uses the rest of the sciences,
and since, again, it legislates as to what we are to do and what we
are to abstain from, the end of this science must include those of
the others, so that this end must be the good for man. For even if
the end is the same for a single man and for a state, that of the
state seems at all events something greater and more complete whether
to attain or to preserve; though it is worth while to attain the end
merely for one man, it is finer and more godlike to attain it for
a nation or for city-states. These, then, are the ends at which our
inquiry aims, since it is political science, in one sense of that
term. 

3 

Our discussion will be adequate if it has as much clearness as the
subject-matter admits of, for precision is not to be sought for alike
in all discussions, any more than in all the products of the crafts.
Now fine and just actions, which political science investigates, admit
of much variety and fluctuation of opinion, so that they may be thought
to exist only by convention, and not by nature. And goods also give
rise to a similar fluctuation because they bring harm to many people;
for before now men have been undone by reason of their wealth, and
others by reason of their courage. We must be content, then, in speaking
of such subjects and with such premisses to indicate the truth roughly
and in outline, and in speaking about things which are only for the
most part true and with premisses of the same kind to reach conclusions
that are no better. In the same spirit, therefore, should each type
of statement be received; for it is the mark of an educated man to
look for precision in each class of things just so far as the nature
of the subject admits; it is evidently equally foolish to accept probable
reasoning from a mathematician and to demand from a rhetorician scientific
proofs. 

Now each man judges well the things he knows, and of these he is a
good judge. And so the man who has been educated in a subject is a
good judge of that subject, and the man who has received an all-round
education is a good judge in general. Hence a young man is not a proper
hearer of lectures on political science; for he is inexperienced in
the actions that occur in life, but its discussions start from these
and are about these; and, further, since he tends to follow his passions,
his study will be vain and unprofitable, because the end aimed at
is not knowledge but action. And it makes no difference whether he
is young in years or youthful in character; the defect does not depend
on time, but on his living, and pursuing each successive object, as
passion directs. For to such persons, as to the incontinent, knowledge
brings no profit; but to those who desire and act in accordance with
a rational principle knowledge about such matters will be of great
benefit. 

These remarks about the student, the sort of treatment to be expected,
and the purpose of the inquiry, may be taken as our preface.

4 

Let us resume our inquiry and state, in view of the fact that all
knowledge and every pursuit aims at some good, what it is that we
say political science aims at and what is the highest of all goods
achievable by action. Verbally there is very general agreement; for
both the general run of men and people of superior refinement say
that it is happiness, and identify living well and doing well with
being happy; but with regard to what happiness is they differ, and
the many do not give the same account as the wise. For the former
think it is some plain and obvious thing, like pleasure, wealth, or
honour; they differ, however, from one another- and often even the
same man identifies it with different things, with health when he
is ill, with wealth when he is poor; but, conscious of their ignorance,
they admire those who proclaim some great ideal that is above their
comprehension. Now some thought that apart from these many goods there
is another which is self-subsistent and causes the goodness of all
these as well. To examine all the opinions that have been held were
perhaps somewhat fruitless; enough to examine those that are most
prevalent or that seem to be arguable. 

Let us not fail to notice, however, that there is a difference between
arguments from and those to the first principles. For Plato, too,
was right in raising this question and asking, as he used to do, 'are
we on the way from or to the first principles?' There is a difference,
as there is in a race-course between the course from the judges to
the turning-point and the way back. For, while we must begin with
what is known, things are objects of knowledge in two senses- some
to us, some without qualification. Presumably, then, we must begin
with things known to us. Hence any one who is to listen intelligently
to lectures about what is noble and just, and generally, about the
subjects of political science must have been brought up in good habits.
For the fact is the starting-point, and if this is sufficiently plain
to him, he will not at the start need the reason as well; and the
man who has been well brought up has or can easily get startingpoints.
And as for him who neither has nor can get them, let him hear the
words of Hesiod: 

Far best is he who knows all things himself; 
Good, he that hearkens when men counsel right; 
But he who neither knows, nor lays to heart 
Another's wisdom, is a useless wight. 
5 

Let us, however, resume our discussion from the point at which we
digressed. To judge from the lives that men lead, most men, and men
of the most vulgar type, seem (not without some ground) to identify
the good, or happiness, with pleasure; which is the reason why they
love the life of enjoyment. For there are, we may say, three prominent
types of life- that just mentioned, the political, and thirdly the
contemplative life. Now the mass of mankind are evidently quite slavish
in their tastes, preferring a life suitable to beasts, but they get
some ground for their view from the fact that many of those in high
places share the tastes of Sardanapallus. A consideration of the prominent
types of life shows that people of superior refinement and of active
disposition identify happiness with honour; for this is, roughly speaking,
the end of the political life. But it seems too superficial to be
what we are looking for, since it is thought to depend on those who
bestow honour rather than on him who receives it, but the good we
divine to be something proper to a man and not easily taken from him.
Further, men seem to pursue honour in order that they may be assured
of their goodness; at least it is by men of practical wisdom that
they seek to be honoured, and among those who know them, and on the
ground of their virtue; clearly, then, according to them, at any rate,
virtue is better. And perhaps one might even suppose this to be, rather
than honour, the end of the political life. But even this appears
somewhat incomplete; for possession of virtue seems actually compatible
with being asleep, or with lifelong inactivity, and, further, with
the greatest sufferings and misfortunes; but a man who was living
so no one would call happy, unless he were maintaining a thesis at
all costs. But enough of this; for the subject has been sufficiently
treated even in the current discussions. Third comes the contemplative
life, which we shall consider later. 

The life of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion, and wealth
is evidently not the good we are seeking; for it is merely useful
and for the sake of something else. And so one might rather take the
aforenamed objects to be ends; for they are loved for themselves.
But it is evident that not even these are ends; yet many arguments
have been thrown away in support of them. Let us leave this subject,
then. 

6 

We had perhaps better consider the universal good and discuss thoroughly
what is meant by it, although such an inquiry is made an uphill one
by the fact that the Forms have been introduced by friends of our
own. Yet it would perhaps be thought to be better, indeed to be our
duty, for the sake of maintaining the truth even to destroy what touches
us closely, especially as we are philosophers or lovers of wisdom;
for, while both are dear, piety requires us to honour truth above
our friends. 

The men who introduced this doctrine did not posit Ideas of classes
within which they recognized priority and posteriority (which is the
reason why they did not maintain the existence of an Idea embracing
all numbers); but the term 'good' is used both in the category of
substance and in that of quality and in that of relation, and that
which is per se, i.e. substance, is prior in nature to the relative
(for the latter is like an off shoot and accident of being); so that
there could not be a common Idea set over all these goods. Further,
since 'good' has as many senses as 'being' (for it is predicated both
in the category of substance, as of God and of reason, and in quality,
i.e. of the virtues, and in quantity, i.e. of that which is moderate,
and in relation, i.e. of the useful, and in time, i.e. of the right
opportunity, and in place, i.e. of the right locality and the like),
clearly it cannot be something universally present in all cases and
single; for then it could not have been predicated in all the categories
but in one only. Further, since of the things answering to one Idea
there is one science, there would have been one science of all the
goods; but as it is there are many sciences even of the things that
fall under one category, e.g. of opportunity, for opportunity in war
is studied by strategics and in disease by medicine, and the moderate
in food is studied by medicine and in exercise by the science of gymnastics.
And one might ask the question, what in the world they mean by 'a
thing itself', is (as is the case) in 'man himself' and in a particular
man the account of man is one and the same. For in so far as they
are man, they will in no respect differ; and if this is so, neither
will 'good itself' and particular goods, in so far as they are good.
But again it will not be good any the more for being eternal, since
that which lasts long is no whiter than that which perishes in a day.
The Pythagoreans seem to give a more plausible account of the good,
when they place the one in the column of goods; and it is they that
Speusippus seems to have followed. 

But let us discuss these matters elsewhere; an objection to what we
have said, however, may be discerned in the fact that the Platonists
have not been speaking about all goods, and that the goods that are
pursued and loved for themselves are called good by reference to a
single Form, while those which tend to produce or to preserve these
somehow or to prevent their contraries are called so by reference
to these, and in a secondary sense. Clearly, then, goods must be spoken
of in two ways, and some must be good in themselves, the others by
reason of these. Let us separate, then, things good in themselves
from things useful, and consider whether the former are called good
by reference to a single Idea. What sort of goods would one call good
in themselves? Is it those that are pursued even when isolated from
others, such as intelligence, sight, and certain pleasures and honours?
Certainly, if we pursue these also for the sake of something else,
yet one would place them among things good in themselves. Or is nothing
other than the Idea of good good in itself? In that case the Form
will be empty. But if the things we have named are also things good
in themselves, the account of the good will have to appear as something
identical in them all, as that of whiteness is identical in snow and
in white lead. But of honour, wisdom, and pleasure, just in respect
of their goodness, the accounts are distinct and diverse. The good,
therefore, is not some common element answering to one Idea.

But what then do we mean by the good? It is surely not like the things
that only chance to have the same name. Are goods one, then, by being
derived from one good or by all contributing to one good, or are they
rather one by analogy? Certainly as sight is in the body, so is reason
in the soul, and so on in other cases. But perhaps these subjects
had better be dismissed for the present; for perfect precision about
them would be more appropriate to another branch of philosophy. And
similarly with regard to the Idea; even if there is some one good
which is universally predicable of goods or is capable of separate
and independent existence, clearly it could not be achieved or attained
by man; but we are now seeking something attainable. Perhaps, however,
some one might think it worth while to recognize this with a view
to the goods that are attainable and achievable; for having this as
a sort of pattern we shall know better the goods that are good for
us, and if we know them shall attain them. This argument has some
plausibility, but seems to clash with the procedure of the sciences;
for all of these, though they aim at some good and seek to supply
the deficiency of it, leave on one side the knowledge of the good.
Yet that all the exponents of the arts should be ignorant of, and
should not even seek, so great an aid is not probable. It is hard,
too, to see how a weaver or a carpenter will be benefited in regard
to his own craft by knowing this 'good itself', or how the man who
has viewed the Idea itself will be a better doctor or general thereby.
For a doctor seems not even to study health in this way, but the health
of man, or perhaps rather the health of a particular man; it is individuals
that he is healing. But enough of these topics. 

7 

Let us again return to the good we are seeking, and ask what it can
be. It seems different in different actions and arts; it is different
in medicine, in strategy, and in the other arts likewise. What then
is the good of each? Surely that for whose sake everything else is
done. In medicine this is health, in strategy victory, in architecture
a house, in any other sphere something else, and in every action and
pursuit the end; for it is for the sake of this that all men do whatever
else they do. Therefore, if there is an end for all that we do, this
will be the good achievable by action, and if there are more than
one, these will be the goods achievable by action. 

So the argument has by a different course reached the same point;
but we must try to state this even more clearly. Since there are evidently
more than one end, and we choose some of these (e.g. wealth, flutes,
and in general instruments) for the sake of something else, clearly
not all ends are final ends; but the chief good is evidently something
final. Therefore, if there is only one final end, this will be what
we are seeking, and if there are more than one, the most final of
these will be what we are seeking. Now we call that which is in itself
worthy of pursuit more final than that which is worthy of pursuit
for the sake of something else, and that which is never desirable
for the sake of something else more final than the things that are
desirable both in themselves and for the sake of that other thing,
and therefore we call final without qualification that which is always
desirable in itself and never for the sake of something else.

Now such a thing happiness, above all else, is held to be; for this
we choose always for self and never for the sake of something else,
but honour, pleasure, reason, and every virtue we choose indeed for
themselves (for if nothing resulted from them we should still choose
each of them), but we choose them also for the sake of happiness,
judging that by means of them we shall be happy. Happiness, on the
other hand, no one chooses for the sake of these, nor, in general,
for anything other than itself. 

From the point of view of self-sufficiency the same result seems to
follow; for the final good is thought to be self-sufficient. Now by
self-sufficient we do not mean that which is sufficient for a man
by himself, for one who lives a solitary life, but also for parents,
children, wife, and in general for his friends and fellow citizens,
since man is born for citizenship. But some limit must be set to this;
for if we extend our requirement to ancestors and descendants and
friends' friends we are in for an infinite series. Let us examine
this question, however, on another occasion; the self-sufficient we
now define as that which when isolated makes life desirable and lacking
in nothing; and such we think happiness to be; and further we think
it most desirable of all things, without being counted as one good
thing among others- if it were so counted it would clearly be made
more desirable by the addition of even the least of goods; for that
which is added becomes an excess of goods, and of goods the greater
is always more desirable. Happiness, then, is something final and
self-sufficient, and is the end of action. 

Presumably, however, to say that happiness is the chief good seems
a platitude, and a clearer account of what it is still desired. This
might perhaps be given, if we could first ascertain the function of
man. For just as for a flute-player, a sculptor, or an artist, and,
in general, for all things that have a function or activity, the good
and the 'well' is thought to reside in the function, so would it seem
to be for man, if he has a function. Have the carpenter, then, and
the tanner certain functions or activities, and has man none? Is he
born without a function? Or as eye, hand, foot, and in general each
of the parts evidently has a function, may one lay it down that man
similarly has a function apart from all these? What then can this
be? Life seems to be common even to plants, but we are seeking what
is peculiar to man. Let us exclude, therefore, the life of nutrition
and growth. Next there would be a life of perception, but it also
seems to be common even to the horse, the ox, and every animal. There
remains, then, an active life of the element that has a rational principle;
of this, one part has such a principle in the sense of being obedient
to one, the other in the sense of possessing one and exercising thought.
And, as 'life of the rational element' also has two meanings, we must
state that life in the sense of activity is what we mean; for this
seems to be the more proper sense of the term. Now if the function
of man is an activity of soul which follows or implies a rational
principle, and if we say 'so-and-so-and 'a good so-and-so' have a
function which is the same in kind, e.g. a lyre, and a good lyre-player,
and so without qualification in all cases, eminence in respect of
goodness being idded to the name of the function (for the function
of a lyre-player is to play the lyre, and that of a good lyre-player
is to do so well): if this is the case, and we state the function
of man to be a certain kind of life, and this to be an activity or
actions of the soul implying a rational principle, and the function
of a good man to be the good and noble performance of these, and if
any action is well performed when it is performed in accordance with
the appropriate excellence: if this is the case, human good turns
out to be activity of soul in accordance with virtue, and if there
are more than one virtue, in accordance with the best and most complete.

But we must add 'in a complete life.' For one swallow does not make
a summer, nor does one day; and so too one day, or a short time, does
not make a man blessed and happy. 

Let this serve as an outline of the good; for we must presumably first
sketch it roughly, and then later fill in the details. But it would
seem that any one is capable of carrying on and articulating what
has once been well outlined, and that time is a good discoverer or
partner in such a work; to which facts the advances of the arts are
due; for any one can add what is lacking. And we must also remember
what has been said before, and not look for precision in all things
alike, but in each class of things such precision as accords with
the subject-matter, and so much as is appropriate to the inquiry.
For a carpenter and a geometer investigate the right angle in different
ways; the former does so in so far as the right angle is useful for
his work, while the latter inquires what it is or what sort of thing
it is; for he is a spectator of the truth. We must act in the same
way, then, in all other matters as well, that our main task may not
be subordinated to minor questions. Nor must we demand the cause in
all matters alike; it is enough in some cases that the fact be well
established, as in the case of the first principles; the fact is the
primary thing or first principle. Now of first principles we see some
by induction, some by perception, some by a certain habituation, and
others too in other ways. But each set of principles we must try to
investigate in the natural way, and we must take pains to state them
definitely, since they have a great influence on what follows. For
the beginning is thought to be more than half of the whole, and many
of the questions we ask are cleared up by it. 

8 

We must consider it, however, in the light not only of our conclusion
and our premisses, but also of what is commonly said about it; for
with a true view all the data harmonize, but with a false one the
facts soon clash. Now goods have been divided into three classes,
and some are described as external, others as relating to soul or
to body; we call those that relate to soul most properly and truly
goods, and psychical actions and activities we class as relating to
soul. Therefore our account must be sound, at least according to this
view, which is an old one and agreed on by philosophers. It is correct
also in that we identify the end with certain actions and activities;
for thus it falls among goods of the soul and not among external goods.
Another belief which harmonizes with our account is that the happy
man lives well and does well; for we have practically defined happiness
as a sort of good life and good action. The characteristics that are
looked for in happiness seem also, all of them, to belong to what
we have defined happiness as being. For some identify happiness with
virtue, some with practical wisdom, others with a kind of philosophic
wisdom, others with these, or one of these, accompanied by pleasure
or not without pleasure; while others include also external prosperity.
Now some of these views have been held by many men and men of old,
others by a few eminent persons; and it is not probable that either
of these should be entirely mistaken, but rather that they should
be right in at least some one respect or even in most respects.

With those who identify happiness with virtue or some one virtue our
account is in harmony; for to virtue belongs virtuous activity. But
it makes, perhaps, no small difference whether we place the chief
good in possession or in use, in state of mind or in activity. For
the state of mind may exist without producing any good result, as
in a man who is asleep or in some other way quite inactive, but the
activity cannot; for one who has the activity will of necessity be
acting, and acting well. And as in the Olympic Games it is not the
most beautiful and the strongest that are crowned but those who compete
(for it is some of these that are victorious), so those who act win,
and rightly win, the noble and good things in life. 

Their life is also in itself pleasant. For pleasure is a state of
soul, and to each man that which he is said to be a lover of is pleasant;
e.g. not only is a horse pleasant to the lover of horses, and a spectacle
to the lover of sights, but also in the same way just acts are pleasant
to the lover of justice and in general virtuous acts to the lover
of virtue. Now for most men their pleasures are in conflict with one
another because these are not by nature pleasant, but the lovers of
what is noble find pleasant the things that are by nature pleasant;
and virtuous actions are such, so that these are pleasant for such
men as well as in their own nature. Their life, therefore, has no
further need of pleasure as a sort of adventitious charm, but has
its pleasure in itself. For, besides what we have said, the man who
does not rejoice in noble actions is not even good; since no one would
call a man just who did not enjoy acting justly, nor any man liberal
who did not enjoy liberal actions; and similarly in all other cases.
If this is so, virtuous actions must be in themselves pleasant. But
they are also good and noble, and have each of these attributes in
the highest degree, since the good man judges well about these attributes;
his judgement is such as we have described. Happiness then is the
best, noblest, and most pleasant thing in the world, and these attributes
are not severed as in the inscription at Delos- 

Most noble is that which is justest, and best is health;

But pleasantest is it to win what we love. 

For all these properties belong to the best activities; and these,
or one- the best- of these, we identify with happiness. 

Yet evidently, as we said, it needs the external goods as well; for
it is impossible, or not easy, to do noble acts without the proper
equipment. In many actions we use friends and riches and political
power as instruments; and there are some things the lack of which
takes the lustre from happiness, as good birth, goodly children, beauty;
for the man who is very ugly in appearance or ill-born or solitary
and childless is not very likely to be happy, and perhaps a man would
be still less likely if he had thoroughly bad children or friends
or had lost good children or friends by death. As we said, then, happiness
seems to need this sort of prosperity in addition; for which reason
some identify happiness with good fortune, though others identify
it with virtue. 

9 

For this reason also the question is asked, whether happiness is to
be acquired by learning or by habituation or some other sort of training,
or comes in virtue of some divine providence or again by chance. Now
if there is any gift of the gods to men, it is reasonable that happiness
should be god-given, and most surely god-given of all human things
inasmuch as it is the best. But this question would perhaps be more
appropriate to another inquiry; happiness seems, however, even if
it is not god-sent but comes as a result of virtue and some process
of learning or training, to be among the most godlike things; for
that which is the prize and end of virtue seems to be the best thing
in the world, and something godlike and blessed. 

It will also on this view be very generally shared; for all who are
not maimed as regards their potentiality for virtue may win it by
a certain kind of study and care. But if it is better to be happy
thus than by chance, it is reasonable that the facts should be so,
since everything that depends on the action of nature is by nature
as good as it can be, and similarly everything that depends on art
or any rational cause, and especially if it depends on the best of
all causes. To entrust to chance what is greatest and most noble would
be a very defective arrangement. 

The answer to the question we are asking is plain also from the definition
of happiness; for it has been said to be a virtuous activity of soul,
of a certain kind. Of the remaining goods, some must necessarily pre-exist
as conditions of happiness, and others are naturally co-operative
and useful as instruments. And this will be found to agree with what
we said at the outset; for we stated the end of political science
to be the best end, and political science spends most of its pains
on making the citizens to be of a certain character, viz. good and
capable of noble acts. 

It is natural, then, that we call neither ox nor horse nor any other
of the animals happy; for none of them is capable of sharing in such
activity. For this reason also a boy is not happy; for he is not yet
capable of such acts, owing to his age; and boys who are called happy
are being congratulated by reason of the hopes we have for them. For
there is required, as we said, not only complete virtue but also a
complete life, since many changes occur in life, and all manner of
chances, and the most prosperous may fall into great misfortunes in
old age, as is told of Priam in the Trojan Cycle; and one who has
experienced such chances and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy.

10 

Must no one at all, then, be called happy while he lives; must we,
as Solon says, see the end? Even if we are to lay down this doctrine,
is it also the case that a man is happy when he is dead? Or is not
this quite absurd, especially for us who say that happiness is an
activity? But if we do not call the dead man happy, and if Solon does
not mean this, but that one can then safely call a man blessed as
being at last beyond evils and misfortunes, this also affords matter
for discussion; for both evil and good are thought to exist for a
dead man, as much as for one who is alive but not aware of them; e.g.
honours and dishonours and the good or bad fortunes of children and
in general of descendants. And this also presents a problem; for though
a man has lived happily up to old age and has had a death worthy of
his life, many reverses may befall his descendants- some of them may
be good and attain the life they deserve, while with others the opposite
may be the case; and clearly too the degrees of relationship between
them and their ancestors may vary indefinitely. It would be odd, then,
if the dead man were to share in these changes and become at one time
happy, at another wretched; while it would also be odd if the fortunes
of the descendants did not for some time have some effect on the happiness
of their ancestors. 

But we must return to our first difficulty; for perhaps by a consideration
of it our present problem might be solved. Now if we must see the
end and only then call a man happy, not as being happy but as having
been so before, surely this is a paradox, that when he is happy the
attribute that belongs to him is not to be truly predicated of him
because we do not wish to call living men happy, on account of the
changes that may befall them, and because we have assumed happiness
to be something permanent and by no means easily changed, while a
single man may suffer many turns of fortune's wheel. For clearly if
we were to keep pace with his fortunes, we should often call the same
man happy and again wretched, making the happy man out to be chameleon
and insecurely based. Or is this keeping pace with his fortunes quite
wrong? Success or failure in life does not depend on these, but human
life, as we said, needs these as mere additions, while virtuous activities
or their opposites are what constitute happiness or the reverse.

The question we have now discussed confirms our definition. For no
function of man has so much permanence as virtuous activities (these
are thought to be more durable even than knowledge of the sciences),
and of these themselves the most valuable are more durable because
those who are happy spend their life most readily and most continuously
in these; for this seems to be the reason why we do not forget them.
The attribute in question, then, will belong to the happy man, and
he will be happy throughout his life; for always, or by preference
to everything else, he will be engaged in virtuous action and contemplation,
and he will bear the chances of life most nobly and altogether decorously,
if he is 'truly good' and 'foursquare beyond reproach'. 

Now many events happen by chance, and events differing in importance;
small pieces of good fortune or of its opposite clearly do not weigh
down the scales of life one way or the other, but a multitude of great
events if they turn out well will make life happier (for not only
are they themselves such as to add beauty to life, but the way a man
deals with them may be noble and good), while if they turn out ill
they crush and maim happiness; for they both bring pain with them
and hinder many activities. Yet even in these nobility shines through,
when a man bears with resignation many great misfortunes, not through
insensibility to pain but through nobility and greatness of soul.

If activities are, as we said, what gives life its character, no happy
man can become miserable; for he will never do the acts that are hateful
and mean. For the man who is truly good and wise, we think, bears
all the chances life becomingly and always makes the best of circumstances,
as a good general makes the best military use of the army at his command
and a good shoemaker makes the best shoes out of the hides that are
given him; and so with all other craftsmen. And if this is the case,
the happy man can never become miserable; though he will not reach
blessedness, if he meet with fortunes like those of Priam.

Nor, again, is he many-coloured and changeable; for neither will he
be moved from his happy state easily or by any ordinary misadventures,
but only by many great ones, nor, if he has had many great misadventures,
will he recover his happiness in a short time, but if at all, only
in a long and complete one in which he has attained many splendid
successes. 

When then should we not say that he is happy who is active in accordance
with complete virtue and is sufficiently equipped with external goods,
not for some chance period but throughout a complete life? Or must
we add 'and who is destined to live thus and die as befits his life'?
Certainly the future is obscure to us, while happiness, we claim,
is an end and something in every way final. If so, we shall call happy
those among living men in whom these conditions are, and are to be,
fulfilled- but happy men. So much for these questions. 

11 

That the fortunes of descendants and of all a man's friends should
not affect his happiness at all seems a very unfriendly doctrine,
and one opposed to the opinions men hold; but since the events that
happen are numerous and admit of all sorts of difference, and some
come more near to us and others less so, it seems a long- nay, an
infinite- task to discuss each in detail; a general outline will perhaps
suffice. If, then, as some of a man's own misadventures have a certain
weight and influence on life while others are, as it were, lighter,
so too there are differences among the misadventures of our friends
taken as a whole, and it makes a difference whether the various suffering
befall the living or the dead (much more even than whether lawless
and terrible deeds are presupposed in a tragedy or done on the stage),
this difference also must be taken into account; or rather, perhaps,
the fact that doubt is felt whether the dead share in any good or
evil. For it seems, from these considerations, that even if anything
whether good or evil penetrates to them, it must be something weak
and negligible, either in itself or for them, or if not, at least
it must be such in degree and kind as not to make happy those who
are not happy nor to take away their blessedness from those who are.
The good or bad fortunes of friends, then, seem to have some effects
on the dead, but effects of such a kind and degree as neither to make
the happy unhappy nor to produce any other change of the kind.

12 

These questions having been definitely answered, let us consider whether
happiness is among the things that are praised or rather among the
things that are prized; for clearly it is not to be placed among potentialities.
Everything that is praised seems to be praised because it is of a
certain kind and is related somehow to something else; for we praise
the just or brave man and in general both the good man and virtue
itself because of the actions and functions involved, and we praise
the strong man, the good runner, and so on, because he is of a certain
kind and is related in a certain way to something good and important.
This is clear also from the praises of the gods; for it seems absurd
that the gods should be referred to our standard, but this is done
because praise involves a reference, to something else. But if if
praise is for things such as we have described, clearly what applies
to the best things is not praise, but something greater and better,
as is indeed obvious; for what we do to the gods and the most godlike
of men is to call them blessed and happy. And so too with good things;
no one praises happiness as he does justice, but rather calls it blessed,
as being something more divine and better. 

Eudoxus also seems to have been right in his method of advocating
the supremacy of pleasure; he thought that the fact that, though a
good, it is not praised indicated it to be better than the things
that are praised, and that this is what God and the good are; for
by reference to these all other things are judged. Praise is appropriate
to virtue, for as a result of virtue men tend to do noble deeds, but
encomia are bestowed on acts, whether of the body or of the soul.
But perhaps nicety in these matters is more proper to those who have
made a study of encomia; to us it is clear from what has been said
that happiness is among the things that are prized and perfect. It
seems to be so also from the fact that it is a first principle; for
it is for the sake of this that we all do all that we do, and the
first principle and cause of goods is, we claim, something prized
and divine. 

13 

Since happiness is an activity of soul in accordance with perfect
virtue, we must consider the nature of virtue; for perhaps we shall
thus see better the nature of happiness. The true student of politics,
too, is thought to have studied virtue above all things; for he wishes
to make his fellow citizens good and obedient to the laws. As an example
of this we have the lawgivers of the Cretans and the Spartans, and
any others of the kind that there may have been. And if this inquiry
belongs to political science, clearly the pursuit of it will be in
accordance with our original plan. But clearly the virtue we must
study is human virtue; for the good we were seeking was human good
and the happiness human happiness. By human virtue we mean not that
of the body but that of the soul; and happiness also we call an activity
of soul. But if this is so, clearly the student of politics must know
somehow the facts about soul, as the man who is to heal the eyes or
the body as a whole must know about the eyes or the body; and all
the more since politics is more prized and better than medicine; but
even among doctors the best educated spend much labour on acquiring
knowledge of the body. The student of politics, then, must study the
soul, and must study it with these objects in view, and do so just
to the extent which is sufficient for the questions we are discussing;
for further precision is perhaps something more laborious than our
purposes require. 

Some things are said about it, adequately enough, even in the discussions
outside our school, and we must use these; e.g. that one element in
the soul is irrational and one has a rational principle. Whether these
are separated as the parts of the body or of anything divisible are,
or are distinct by definition but by nature inseparable, like convex
and concave in the circumference of a circle, does not affect the
present question. 

Of the irrational element one division seems to be widely distributed,
and vegetative in its nature, I mean that which causes nutrition and
growth; for it is this kind of power of the soul that one must assign
to all nurslings and to embryos, and this same power to fullgrown
creatures; this is more reasonable than to assign some different power
to them. Now the excellence of this seems to be common to all species
and not specifically human; for this part or faculty seems to function
most in sleep, while goodness and badness are least manifest in sleep
(whence comes the saying that the happy are not better off than the
wretched for half their lives; and this happens naturally enough,
since sleep is an inactivity of the soul in that respect in which
it is called good or bad), unless perhaps to a small extent some of
the movements actually penetrate to the soul, and in this respect
the dreams of good men are better than those of ordinary people. Enough
of this subject, however; let us leave the nutritive faculty alone,
since it has by its nature no share in human excellence.

There seems to be also another irrational element in the soul-one
which in a sense, however, shares in a rational principle. For we
praise the rational principle of the continent man and of the incontinent,
and the part of their soul that has such a principle, since it urges
them aright and towards the best objects; but there is found in them
also another element naturally opposed to the rational principle,
which fights against and resists that principle. For exactly as paralysed
limbs when we intend to move them to the right turn on the contrary
to the left, so is it with the soul; the impulses of incontinent people
move in contrary directions. But while in the body we see that which
moves astray, in the soul we do not. No doubt, however, we must none
the less suppose that in the soul too there is something contrary
to the rational principle, resisting and opposing it. In what sense
it is distinct from the other elements does not concern us. Now even
this seems to have a share in a rational principle, as we said; at
any rate in the continent man it obeys the rational principle and
presumably in the temperate and brave man it is still more obedient;
for in him it speaks, on all matters, with the same voice as the rational
principle. 

Therefore the irrational element also appears to be two-fold. For
the vegetative element in no way shares in a rational principle, but
the appetitive and in general the desiring element in a sense shares
in it, in so far as it listens to and obeys it; this is the sense
in which we speak of 'taking account' of one's father or one's friends,
not that in which we speak of 'accounting for a mathematical property.
That the irrational element is in some sense persuaded by a rational
principle is indicated also by the giving of advice and by all reproof
and exhortation. And if this element also must be said to have a rational
principle, that which has a rational principle (as well as that which
has not) will be twofold, one subdivision having it in the strict
sense and in itself, and the other having a tendency to obey as one
does one's father. 

Virtue too is distinguished into kinds in accordance with this difference;
for we say that some of the virtues are intellectual and others moral,
philosophic wisdom and understanding and practical wisdom being intellectual,
liberality and temperance moral. For in speaking about a man's character
we do not say that he is wise or has understanding but that he is
good-tempered or temperate; yet we praise the wise man also with respect
to his state of mind; and of states of mind we call those which merit
praise virtues. 



BOOK II

1 

Virtue, then, being of two kinds, intellectual and moral, intellectual
virtue in the main owes both its birth and its growth to teaching
(for which reason it requires experience and time), while moral virtue
comes about as a result of habit, whence also its name (ethike) is
one that is formed by a slight variation from the word ethos (habit).
From this it is also plain that none of the moral virtues arises in
us by nature; for nothing that exists by nature can form a habit contrary
to its nature. For instance the stone which by nature moves downwards
cannot be habituated to move upwards, not even if one tries to train
it by throwing it up ten thousand times; nor can fire be habituated
to move downwards, nor can anything else that by nature behaves in
one way be trained to behave in another. Neither by nature, then,
nor contrary to nature do the virtues arise in us; rather we are adapted
by nature to receive them, and are made perfect by habit.

Again, of all the things that come to us by nature we first acquire
the potentiality and later exhibit the activity (this is plain in
the case of the senses; for it was not by often seeing or often hearing
that we got these senses, but on the contrary we had them before we
used them, and did not come to have them by using them); but the virtues
we get by first exercising them, as also happens in the case of the
arts as well. For the things we have to learn before we can do them,
we learn by doing them, e.g. men become builders by building and lyreplayers
by playing the lyre; so too we become just by doing just acts, temperate
by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts. 

This is confirmed by what happens in states; for legislators make
the citizens good by forming habits in them, and this is the wish
of every legislator, and those who do not effect it miss their mark,
and it is in this that a good constitution differs from a bad one.

Again, it is from the same causes and by the same means that every
virtue is both produced and destroyed, and similarly every art; for
it is from playing the lyre that both good and bad lyre-players are
produced. And the corresponding statement is true of builders and
of all the rest; men will be good or bad builders as a result of building
well or badly. For if this were not so, there would have been no need
of a teacher, but all men would have been born good or bad at their
craft. This, then, is the case with the virtues also; by doing the
acts that we do in our transactions with other men we become just
or unjust, and by doing the acts that we do in the presence of danger,
and being habituated to feel fear or confidence, we become brave or
cowardly. The same is true of appetites and feelings of anger; some
men become temperate and good-tempered, others self-indulgent and
irascible, by behaving in one way or the other in the appropriate
circumstances. Thus, in one word, states of character arise out of
like activities. This is why the activities we exhibit must be of
a certain kind; it is because the states of character correspond to
the differences between these. It makes no small difference, then,
whether we form habits of one kind or of another from our very youth;
it makes a very great difference, or rather all the difference.

2 

Since, then, the present inquiry does not aim at theoretical knowledge
like the others (for we are inquiring not in order to know what virtue
is, but in order to become good, since otherwise our inquiry would
have been of no use), we must examine the nature of actions, namely
how we ought to do them; for these determine also the nature of the
states of character that are produced, as we have said. Now, that
we must act according to the right rule is a common principle and
must be assumed-it will be discussed later, i.e. both what the right
rule is, and how it is related to the other virtues. But this must
be agreed upon beforehand, that the whole account of matters of conduct
must be given in outline and not precisely, as we said at the very
beginning that the accounts we demand must be in accordance with the
subject-matter; matters concerned with conduct and questions of what
is good for us have no fixity, any more than matters of health. The
general account being of this nature, the account of particular cases
is yet more lacking in exactness; for they do not fall under any art
or precept but the agents themselves must in each case consider what
is appropriate to the occasion, as happens also in the art of medicine
or of navigation. 

But though our present account is of this nature we must give what
help we can. First, then, let us consider this, that it is the nature
of such things to be destroyed by defect and excess, as we see in
the case of strength and of health (for to gain light on things imperceptible
we must use the evidence of sensible things); both excessive and defective
exercise destroys the strength, and similarly drink or food which
is above or below a certain amount destroys the health, while that
which is proportionate both produces and increases and preserves it.
So too is it, then, in the case of temperance and courage and the
other virtues. For the man who flies from and fears everything and
does not stand his ground against anything becomes a coward, and the
man who fears nothing at all but goes to meet every danger becomes
rash; and similarly the man who indulges in every pleasure and abstains
from none becomes self-indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure,
as boors do, becomes in a way insensible; temperance and courage,
then, are destroyed by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean.

But not only are the sources and causes of their origination and growth
the same as those of their destruction, but also the sphere of their
actualization will be the same; for this is also true of the things
which are more evident to sense, e.g. of strength; it is produced
by taking much food and undergoing much exertion, and it is the strong
man that will be most able to do these things. So too is it with the
virtues; by abstaining from pleasures we become temperate, and it
is when we have become so that we are most able to abstain from them;
and similarly too in the case of courage; for by being habituated
to despise things that are terrible and to stand our ground against
them we become brave, and it is when we have become so that we shall
be most able to stand our ground against them. 

3 

We must take as a sign of states of character the pleasure or pain
that ensues on acts; for the man who abstains from bodily pleasures
and delights in this very fact is temperate, while the man who is
annoyed at it is self-indulgent, and he who stands his ground against
things that are terrible and delights in this or at least is not pained
is brave, while the man who is pained is a coward. For moral excellence
is concerned with pleasures and pains; it is on account of the pleasure
that we do bad things, and on account of the pain that we abstain
from noble ones. Hence we ought to have been brought up in a particular
way from our very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in and
to be pained by the things that we ought; for this is the right education.

Again, if the virtues are concerned with actions and passions, and
every passion and every action is accompanied by pleasure and pain,
for this reason also virtue will be concerned with pleasures and pains.
This is indicated also by the fact that punishment is inflicted by
these means; for it is a kind of cure, and it is the nature of cures
to be effected by contraries. 

Again, as we said but lately, every state of soul has a nature relative
to and concerned with the kind of things by which it tends to be made
worse or better; but it is by reason of pleasures and pains that men
become bad, by pursuing and avoiding these- either the pleasures and
pains they ought not or when they ought not or as they ought not,
or by going wrong in one of the other similar ways that may be distinguished.
Hence men even define the virtues as certain states of impassivity
and rest; not well, however, because they speak absolutely, and do
not say 'as one ought' and 'as one ought not' and 'when one ought
or ought not', and the other things that may be added. We assume,
then, that this kind of excellence tends to do what is best with regard
to pleasures and pains, and vice does the contrary. 

The following facts also may show us that virtue and vice are concerned
with these same things. There being three objects of choice and three
of avoidance, the noble, the advantageous, the pleasant, and their
contraries, the base, the injurious, the painful, about all of these
the good man tends to go right and the bad man to go wrong, and especially
about pleasure; for this is common to the animals, and also it accompanies
all objects of choice; for even the noble and the advantageous appear
pleasant. 

Again, it has grown up with us all from our infancy; this is why it
is difficult to rub off this passion, engrained as it is in our life.
And we measure even our actions, some of us more and others less,
by the rule of pleasure and pain. For this reason, then, our whole
inquiry must be about these; for to feel delight and pain rightly
or wrongly has no small effect on our actions. 

Again, it is harder to fight with pleasure than with anger, to use
Heraclitus' phrase', but both art and virtue are always concerned
with what is harder; for even the good is better when it is harder.
Therefore for this reason also the whole concern both of virtue and
of political science is with pleasures and pains; for the man who
uses these well will be good, he who uses them badly bad.

That virtue, then, is concerned with pleasures and pains, and that
by the acts from which it arises it is both increased and, if they
are done differently, destroyed, and that the acts from which it arose
are those in which it actualizes itself- let this be taken as said.

4 

The question might be asked,; what we mean by saying that we must
become just by doing just acts, and temperate by doing temperate acts;
for if men do just and temperate acts, they are already just and temperate,
exactly as, if they do what is in accordance with the laws of grammar
and of music, they are grammarians and musicians. 

Or is this not true even of the arts? It is possible to do something
that is in accordance with the laws of grammar, either by chance or
at the suggestion of another. A man will be a grammarian, then, only
when he has both done something grammatical and done it grammatically;
and this means doing it in accordance with the grammatical knowledge
in himself. 

Again, the case of the arts and that of the virtues are not similar;
for the products of the arts have their goodness in themselves, so
that it is enough that they should have a certain character, but if
the acts that are in accordance with the virtues have themselves a
certain character it does not follow that they are done justly or
temperately. The agent also must be in a certain condition when he
does them; in the first place he must have knowledge, secondly he
must choose the acts, and choose them for their own sakes, and thirdly
his action must proceed from a firm and unchangeable character. These
are not reckoned in as conditions of the possession of the arts, except
the bare knowledge; but as a condition of the possession of the virtues
knowledge has little or no weight, while the other conditions count
not for a little but for everything, i.e. the very conditions which
result from often doing just and temperate acts. 

Actions, then, are called just and temperate when they are such as
the just or the temperate man would do; but it is not the man who
does these that is just and temperate, but the man who also does them
as just and temperate men do them. It is well said, then, that it
is by doing just acts that the just man is produced, and by doing
temperate acts the temperate man; without doing these no one would
have even a prospect of becoming good. 

But most people do not do these, but take refuge in theory and think
they are being philosophers and will become good in this way, behaving
somewhat like patients who listen attentively to their doctors, but
do none of the things they are ordered to do. As the latter will not
be made well in body by such a course of treatment, the former will
not be made well in soul by such a course of philosophy.

5 

Next we must consider what virtue is. Since things that are found
in the soul are of three kinds- passions, faculties, states of character,
virtue must be one of these. By passions I mean appetite, anger, fear,
confidence, envy, joy, friendly feeling, hatred, longing, emulation,
pity, and in general the feelings that are accompanied by pleasure
or pain; by faculties the things in virtue of which we are said to
be capable of feeling these, e.g. of becoming angry or being pained
or feeling pity; by states of character the things in virtue of which
we stand well or badly with reference to the passions, e.g. with reference
to anger we stand badly if we feel it violently or too weakly, and
well if we feel it moderately; and similarly with reference to the
other passions. 

Now neither the virtues nor the vices are passions, because we are
not called good or bad on the ground of our passions, but are so called
on the ground of our virtues and our vices, and because we are neither
praised nor blamed for our passions (for the man who feels fear or
anger is not praised, nor is the man who simply feels anger blamed,
but the man who feels it in a certain way), but for our virtues and
our vices we are praised or blamed. 

Again, we feel anger and fear without choice, but the virtues are
modes of choice or involve choice. Further, in respect of the passions
we are said to be moved, but in respect of the virtues and the vices
we are said not to be moved but to be disposed in a particular way.

For these reasons also they are not faculties; for we are neither
called good nor bad, nor praised nor blamed, for the simple capacity
of feeling the passions; again, we have the faculties by nature, but
we are not made good or bad by nature; we have spoken of this before.
If, then, the virtues are neither passions nor faculties, all that
remains is that they should be states of character. 

Thus we have stated what virtue is in respect of its genus.

6 

We must, however, not only describe virtue as a state of character,
but also say what sort of state it is. We may remark, then, that every
virtue or excellence both brings into good condition the thing of
which it is the excellence and makes the work of that thing be done
well; e.g. the excellence of the eye makes both the eye and its work
good; for it is by the excellence of the eye that we see well. Similarly
the excellence of the horse makes a horse both good in itself and
good at running and at carrying its rider and at awaiting the attack
of the enemy. Therefore, if this is true in every case, the virtue
of man also will be the state of character which makes a man good
and which makes him do his own work well. 

How this is to happen we have stated already, but it will be made
plain also by the following consideration of the specific nature of
virtue. In everything that is continuous and divisible it is possible
to take more, less, or an equal amount, and that either in terms of
the thing itself or relatively to us; and the equal is an intermediate
between excess and defect. By the intermediate in the object I mean
that which is equidistant from each of the extremes, which is one
and the same for all men; by the intermediate relatively to us that
which is neither too much nor too little- and this is not one, nor
the same for all. For instance, if ten is many and two is few, six
is the intermediate, taken in terms of the object; for it exceeds
and is exceeded by an equal amount; this is intermediate according
to arithmetical proportion. But the intermediate relatively to us
is not to be taken so; if ten pounds are too much for a particular
person to eat and two too little, it does not follow that the trainer
will order six pounds; for this also is perhaps too much for the person
who is to take it, or too little- too little for Milo, too much for
the beginner in athletic exercises. The same is true of running and
wrestling. Thus a master of any art avoids excess and defect, but
seeks the intermediate and chooses this- the intermediate not in the
object but relatively to us. 

If it is thus, then, that every art does its work well- by looking
to the intermediate and judgling its works by this standard (so that
we often say of good works of art that it is not possible either to
take away or to add anything, implying that excess and defect destroy
the goodness of works of art, while the mean preserves it; and good
artists, as we say, look to this in their work), and if, further,
virtue is more exact and better than any art, as nature also is, then
virtue must have the quality of aiming at the intermediate. I mean
moral virtue; for it is this that is concerned with passions and actions,
and in these there is excess, defect, and the intermediate. For instance,
both fear and confidence and appetite and anger and pity and in general
pleasure and pain may be felt both too much and too little, and in
both cases not well; but to feel them at the right times, with reference
to the right objects, towards the right people, with the right motive,
and in the right way, is what is both intermediate and best, and this
is characteristic of virtue. Similarly with regard to actions also
there is excess, defect, and the intermediate. Now virtue is concerned
with passions and actions, in which excess is a form of failure, and
so is defect, while the intermediate is praised and is a form of success;
and being praised and being successful are both characteristics of
virtue. Therefore virtue is a kind of mean, since, as we have seen,
it aims at what is intermediate. 

Again, it is possible to fail in many ways (for evil belongs to the
class of the unlimited, as the Pythagoreans conjectured, and good
to that of the limited), while to succeed is possible only in one
way (for which reason also one is easy and the other difficult- to
miss the mark easy, to hit it difficult); for these reasons also,
then, excess and defect are characteristic of vice, and the mean of
virtue; 

For men are good in but one way, but bad in many. 

Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned with choice, lying
in a mean, i.e. the mean relative to us, this being determined by
a rational principle, and by that principle by which the man of practical
wisdom would determine it. Now it is a mean between two vices, that
which depends on excess and that which depends on defect; and again
it is a mean because the vices respectively fall short of or exceed
what is right in both passions and actions, while virtue both finds
and chooses that which is intermediate. Hence in respect of its substance
and the definition which states its essence virtue is a mean, with
regard to what is best and right an extreme. 

But not every action nor every passion admits of a mean; for some
have names that already imply badness, e.g. spite, shamelessness,
envy, and in the case of actions adultery, theft, murder; for all
of these and suchlike things imply by their names that they are themselves
bad, and not the excesses or deficiencies of them. It is not possible,
then, ever to be right with regard to them; one must always be wrong.
Nor does goodness or badness with regard to such things depend on
committing adultery with the right woman, at the right time, and in
the right way, but simply to do any of them is to go wrong. It would
be equally absurd, then, to expect that in unjust, cowardly, and voluptuous
action there should be a mean, an excess, and a deficiency; for at
that rate there would be a mean of excess and of deficiency, an excess
of excess, and a deficiency of deficiency. But as there is no excess
and deficiency of temperance and courage because what is intermediate
is in a sense an extreme, so too of the actions we have mentioned
there is no mean nor any excess and deficiency, but however they are
done they are wrong; for in general there is neither a mean of excess
and deficiency, nor excess and deficiency of a mean. 

7 

We must, however, not only make this general statement, but also apply
it to the individual facts. For among statements about conduct those
which are general apply more widely, but those which are particular
are more genuine, since conduct has to do with individual cases, and
our statements must harmonize with the facts in these cases. We may
take these cases from our table. With regard to feelings of fear and
confidence courage is the mean; of the people who exceed, he who exceeds
in fearlessness has no name (many of the states have no name), while
the man who exceeds in confidence is rash, and he who exceeds in fear
and falls short in confidence is a coward. With regard to pleasures
and pains- not all of them, and not so much with regard to the pains-
the mean is temperance, the excess self-indulgence. Persons deficient
with regard to the pleasures are not often found; hence such persons
also have received no name. But let us call them 'insensible'.

With regard to giving and taking of money the mean is liberality,
the excess and the defect prodigality and meanness. In these actions
people exceed and fall short in contrary ways; the prodigal exceeds
in spending and falls short in taking, while the mean man exceeds
in taking and falls short in spending. (At present we are giving a
mere outline or summary, and are satisfied with this; later these
states will be more exactly determined.) With regard to money there
are also other dispositions- a mean, magnificence (for the magnificent
man differs from the liberal man; the former deals with large sums,
the latter with small ones), an excess, tastelessness and vulgarity,
and a deficiency, niggardliness; these differ from the states opposed
to liberality, and the mode of their difference will be stated later.
With regard to honour and dishonour the mean is proper pride, the
excess is known as a sort of 'empty vanity', and the deficiency is
undue humility; and as we said liberality was related to magnificence,
differing from it by dealing with small sums, so there is a state
similarly related to proper pride, being concerned with small honours
while that is concerned with great. For it is possible to desire honour
as one ought, and more than one ought, and less, and the man who exceeds
in his desires is called ambitious, the man who falls short unambitious,
while the intermediate person has no name. The dispositions also are
nameless, except that that of the ambitious man is called ambition.
Hence the people who are at the extremes lay claim to the middle place;
and we ourselves sometimes call the intermediate person ambitious
and sometimes unambitious, and sometimes praise the ambitious man
and sometimes the unambitious. The reason of our doing this will be
stated in what follows; but now let us speak of the remaining states
according to the method which has been indicated. 

With regard to anger also there is an excess, a deficiency, and a
mean. Although they can scarcely be said to have names, yet since
we call the intermediate person good-tempered let us call the mean
good temper; of the persons at the extremes let the one who exceeds
be called irascible, and his vice irascibility, and the man who falls
short an inirascible sort of person, and the deficiency inirascibility.

There are also three other means, which have a certain likeness to
one another, but differ from one another: for they are all concerned
with intercourse in words and actions, but differ in that one is concerned
with truth in this sphere, the other two with pleasantness; and of
this one kind is exhibited in giving amusement, the other in all the
circumstances of life. We must therefore speak of these too, that
we may the better see that in all things the mean is praise-worthy,
and the extremes neither praiseworthy nor right, but worthy of blame.
Now most of these states also have no names, but we must try, as in
the other cases, to invent names ourselves so that we may be clear
and easy to follow. With regard to truth, then, the intermediate is
a truthful sort of person and the mean may be called truthfulness,
while the pretence which exaggerates is boastfulness and the person
characterized by it a boaster, and that which understates is mock
modesty and the person characterized by it mock-modest. With regard
to pleasantness in the giving of amusement the intermediate person
is ready-witted and the disposition ready wit, the excess is buffoonery
and the person characterized by it a buffoon, while the man who falls
short is a sort of boor and his state is boorishness. With regard
to the remaining kind of pleasantness, that which is exhibited in
life in general, the man who is pleasant in the right way is friendly
and the mean is friendliness, while the man who exceeds is an obsequious
person if he has no end in view, a flatterer if he is aiming at his
own advantage, and the man who falls short and is unpleasant in all
circumstances is a quarrelsome and surly sort of person.

There are also means in the passions and concerned with the passions;
since shame is not a virtue, and yet praise is extended to the modest
man. For even in these matters one man is said to be intermediate,
and another to exceed, as for instance the bashful man who is ashamed
of everything; while he who falls short or is not ashamed of anything
at all is shameless, and the intermediate person is modest. Righteous
indignation is a mean between envy and spite, and these states are
concerned with the pain and pleasure that are felt at the fortunes
of our neighbours; the man who is characterized by righteous indignation
is pained at undeserved good fortune, the envious man, going beyond
him, is pained at all good fortune, and the spiteful man falls so
far short of being pained that he even rejoices. But these states
there will be an opportunity of describing elsewhere; with regard
to justice, since it has not one simple meaning, we shall, after describing
the other states, distinguish its two kinds and say how each of them
is a mean; and similarly we shall treat also of the rational virtues.

8 

There are three kinds of disposition, then, two of them vices, involving
excess and deficiency respectively, and one a virtue, viz. the mean,
and all are in a sense opposed to all; for the extreme states are
contrary both to the intermediate state and to each other, and the
intermediate to the extremes; as the equal is greater relatively to
the less, less relatively to the greater, so the middle states are
excessive relatively to the deficiencies, deficient relatively to
the excesses, both in passions and in actions. For the brave man appears
rash relatively to the coward, and cowardly relatively to the rash
man; and similarly the temperate man appears self-indulgent relatively
to the insensible man, insensible relatively to the self-indulgent,
and the liberal man prodigal relatively to the mean man, mean relatively
to the prodigal. Hence also the people at the extremes push the intermediate
man each over to the other, and the brave man is called rash by the
coward, cowardly by the rash man, and correspondingly in the other
cases. 

These states being thus opposed to one another, the greatest contrariety
is that of the extremes to each other, rather than to the intermediate;
for these are further from each other than from the intermediate,
as the great is further from the small and the small from the great
than both are from the equal. Again, to the intermediate some extremes
show a certain likeness, as that of rashness to courage and that of
prodigality to liberality; but the extremes show the greatest unlikeness
to each other; now contraries are defined as the things that are furthest
from each other, so that things that are further apart are more contrary.

To the mean in some cases the deficiency, in some the excess is more
opposed; e.g. it is not rashness, which is an excess, but cowardice,
which is a deficiency, that is more opposed to courage, and not insensibility,
which is a deficiency, but self-indulgence, which is an excess, that
is more opposed to temperance. This happens from two reasons, one
being drawn from the thing itself; for because one extreme is nearer
and liker to the intermediate, we oppose not this but rather its contrary
to the intermediate. E.g. since rashness is thought liker and nearer
to courage, and cowardice more unlike, we oppose rather the latter
to courage; for things that are further from the intermediate are
thought more contrary to it. This, then, is one cause, drawn from
the thing itself; another is drawn from ourselves; for the things
to which we ourselves more naturally tend seem more contrary to the
intermediate. For instance, we ourselves tend more naturally to pleasures,
and hence are more easily carried away towards self-indulgence than
towards propriety. We describe as contrary to the mean, then, rather
the directions in which we more often go to great lengths; and therefore
self-indulgence, which is an excess, is the more contrary to temperance.

9 

That moral virtue is a mean, then, and in what sense it is so, and
that it is a mean between two vices, the one involving excess, the
other deficiency, and that it is such because its character is to
aim at what is intermediate in passions and in actions, has been sufficiently
stated. Hence also it is no easy task to be good. For in everything
it is no easy task to find the middle, e.g. to find the middle of
a circle is not for every one but for him who knows; so, too, any
one can get angry- that is easy- or give or spend money; but to do
this to the right person, to the right extent, at the right time,
with the right motive, and in the right way, that is not for every
one, nor is it easy; wherefore goodness is both rare and laudable
and noble. 

Hence he who aims at the intermediate must first depart from what
is the more contrary to it, as Calypso advises- 

Hold the ship out beyond that surf and spray. 

For of the extremes one is more erroneous, one less so; therefore,
since to hit the mean is hard in the extreme, we must as a second
best, as people say, take the least of the evils; and this will be
done best in the way we describe. But we must consider the things
towards which we ourselves also are easily carried away; for some
of us tend to one thing, some to another; and this will be recognizable
from the pleasure and the pain we feel. We must drag ourselves away
to the contrary extreme; for we shall get into the intermediate state
by drawing well away from error, as people do in straightening sticks
that are bent. 

Now in everything the pleasant or pleasure is most to be guarded against;
for we do not judge it impartially. We ought, then, to feel towards
pleasure as the elders of the people felt towards Helen, and in all
circumstances repeat their saying; for if we dismiss pleasure thus
we are less likely to go astray. It is by doing this, then, (to sum
the matter up) that we shall best be able to hit the mean.

But this is no doubt difficult, and especially in individual cases;
for or is not easy to determine both how and with whom and on what
provocation and how long one should be angry; for we too sometimes
praise those who fall short and call them good-tempered, but sometimes
we praise those who get angry and call them manly. The man, however,
who deviates little from goodness is not blamed, whether he do so
in the direction of the more or of the less, but only the man who
deviates more widely; for he does not fail to be noticed. But up to
what point and to what extent a man must deviate before he becomes
blameworthy it is not easy to determine by reasoning, any more than
anything else that is perceived by the senses; such things depend
on particular facts, and the decision rests with perception. So much,
then, is plain, that the intermediate state is in all things to be
praised, but that we must incline sometimes towards the excess, sometimes
towards the deficiency; for so shall we most easily hit the mean and
what is right. 



BOOK III

1 

Since virtue is concerned with passions and actions, and on voluntary
passions and actions praise and blame are bestowed, on those that
are involuntary pardon, and sometimes also pity, to distinguish the
voluntary and the involuntary is presumably necessary for those who
are studying the nature of virtue, and useful also for legislators
with a view to the assigning both of honours and of punishments. Those
things, then, are thought-involuntary, which take place under compulsion
or owing to ignorance; and that is compulsory of which the moving
principle is outside, being a principle in which nothing is contributed
by the person who is acting or is feeling the passion, e.g. if he
were to be carried somewhere by a wind, or by men who had him in their
power. 

But with regard to the things that are done from fear of greater evils
or for some noble object (e.g. if a tyrant were to order one to do
something base, having one's parents and children in his power, and
if one did the action they were to be saved, but otherwise would be
put to death), it may be debated whether such actions are involuntary
or voluntary. Something of the sort happens also with regard to the
throwing of goods overboard in a storm; for in the abstract no one
throws goods away voluntarily, but on condition of its securing the
safety of himself and his crew any sensible man does so. Such actions,
then, are mixed, but are more like voluntary actions; for they are
worthy of choice at the time when they are done, and the end of an
action is relative to the occasion. Both the terms, then, 'voluntary'
and 'involuntary', must be used with reference to the moment of action.
Now the man acts voluntarily; for the principle that moves the instrumental
parts of the body in such actions is in him, and the things of which
the moving principle is in a man himself are in his power to do or
not to do. Such actions, therefore, are voluntary, but in the abstract
perhaps involuntary; for no one would choose any such act in itself.

For such actions men are sometimes even praised, when they endure
something base or painful in return for great and noble objects gained;
in the opposite case they are blamed, since to endure the greatest
indignities for no noble end or for a trifling end is the mark of
an inferior person. On some actions praise indeed is not bestowed,
but pardon is, when one does what he ought not under pressure which
overstrains human nature and which no one could withstand. But some
acts, perhaps, we cannot be forced to do, but ought rather to face
death after the most fearful sufferings; for the things that 'forced'
Euripides Alcmaeon to slay his mother seem absurd. It is difficult
sometimes to determine what should be chosen at what cost, and what
should be endured in return for what gain, and yet more difficult
to abide by our decisions; for as a rule what is expected is painful,
and what we are forced to do is base, whence praise and blame are
bestowed on those who have been compelled or have not. 

What sort of acts, then, should be called compulsory? We answer that
without qualification actions are so when the cause is in the external
circumstances and the agent contributes nothing. But the things that
in themselves are involuntary, but now and in return for these gains
are worthy of choice, and whose moving principle is in the agent,
are in themselves involuntary, but now and in return for these gains
voluntary. They are more like voluntary acts; for actions are in the
class of particulars, and the particular acts here are voluntary.
What sort of things are to be chosen, and in return for what, it is
not easy to state; for there are many differences in the particular
cases. 

But if some one were to say that pleasant and noble objects have a
compelling power, forcing us from without, all acts would be for him
compulsory; for it is for these objects that all men do everything
they do. And those who act under compulsion and unwillingly act with
pain, but those who do acts for their pleasantness and nobility do
them with pleasure; it is absurd to make external circumstances responsible,
and not oneself, as being easily caught by such attractions, and to
make oneself responsible for noble acts but the pleasant objects responsible
for base acts. The compulsory, then, seems to be that whose moving
principle is outside, the person compelled contributing nothing.

Everything that is done by reason of ignorance is not voluntary; it
is only what produces pain and repentance that is involuntary. For
the man who has done something owing to ignorance, and feels not the
least vexation at his action, has not acted voluntarily, since he
did not know what he was doing, nor yet involuntarily, since he is
not pained. Of people, then, who act by reason of ignorance he who
repents is thought an involuntary agent, and the man who does not
repent may, since he is different, be called a not voluntary agent;
for, since he differs from the other, it is better that he should
have a name of his own. 

Acting by reason of ignorance seems also to be different from acting
in ignorance; for the man who is drunk or in a rage is thought to
act as a result not of ignorance but of one of the causes mentioned,
yet not knowingly but in ignorance. 

Now every wicked man is ignorant of what he ought to do and what he
ought to abstain from, and it is by reason of error of this kind that
men become unjust and in general bad; but the term 'involuntary' tends
to be used not if a man is ignorant of what is to his advantage- for
it is not mistaken purpose that causes involuntary action (it leads
rather to wickedness), nor ignorance of the universal (for that men
are blamed), but ignorance of particulars, i.e. of the circumstances
of the action and the objects with which it is concerned. For it is
on these that both pity and pardon depend, since the person who is
ignorant of any of these acts involuntarily. 

Perhaps it is just as well, therefore, to determine their nature and
number. A man may be ignorant, then, of who he is, what he is doing,
what or whom he is acting on, and sometimes also what (e.g. what instrument)
he is doing it with, and to what end (e.g. he may think his act will
conduce to some one's safety), and how he is doing it (e.g. whether
gently or violently). Now of all of these no one could be ignorant
unless he were mad, and evidently also he could not be ignorant of
the agent; for how could he not know himself? But of what he is doing
a man might be ignorant, as for instance people say 'it slipped out
of their mouths as they were speaking', or 'they did not know it was
a secret', as Aeschylus said of the mysteries, or a man might say
he 'let it go off when he merely wanted to show its working', as the
man did with the catapult. Again, one might think one's son was an
enemy, as Merope did, or that a pointed spear had a button on it,
or that a stone was pumicestone; or one might give a man a draught
to save him, and really kill him; or one might want to touch a man,
as people do in sparring, and really wound him. The ignorance may
relate, then, to any of these things, i.e. of the circumstances of
the action, and the man who was ignorant of any of these is thought
to have acted involuntarily, and especially if he was ignorant on
the most important points; and these are thought to be the circumstances
of the action and its end. Further, the doing of an act that is called
involuntary in virtue of ignorance of this sort must be painful and
involve repentance. 

Since that which is done under compulsion or by reason of ignorance
is involuntary, the voluntary would seem to be that of which the moving
principle is in the agent himself, he being aware of the particular
circumstances of the action. Presumably acts done by reason of anger
or appetite are not rightly called involuntary. For in the first place,
on that showing none of the other animals will act voluntarily, nor
will children; and secondly, is it meant that we do not do voluntarily
any of the acts that are due to appetite or anger, or that we do the
noble acts voluntarily and the base acts involuntarily? Is not this
absurd, when one and the same thing is the cause? But it would surely
be odd to describe as involuntary the things one ought to desire;
and we ought both to be angry at certain things and to have an appetite
for certain things, e.g. for health and for learning. Also what is
involuntary is thought to be painful, but what is in accordance with
appetite is thought to be pleasant. Again, what is the difference
in respect of involuntariness between errors committed upon calculation
and those committed in anger? Both are to be avoided, but the irrational
passions are thought not less human than reason is, and therefore
also the actions which proceed from anger or appetite are the man's
actions. It would be odd, then, to treat them as involuntary.

2 

Both the voluntary and the involuntary having been delimited, we must
next discuss choice; for it is thought to be most closely bound up
with virtue and to discriminate characters better than actions do.

Choice, then, seems to be voluntary, but not the same thing as the
voluntary; the latter extends more widely. For both children and the
lower animals share in voluntary action, but not in choice, and acts
done on the spur of the moment we describe as voluntary, but not as
chosen. 

Those who say it is appetite or anger or wish or a kind of opinion
do not seem to be right. For choice is not common to irrational creatures
as well, but appetite and anger are. Again, the incontinent man acts
with appetite, but not with choice; while the continent man on the
contrary acts with choice, but not with appetite. Again, appetite
is contrary to choice, but not appetite to appetite. Again, appetite
relates to the pleasant and the painful, choice neither to the painful
nor to the pleasant. 

Still less is it anger; for acts due to anger are thought to be less
than any others objects of choice. 

But neither is it wish, though it seems near to it; for choice cannot
relate to impossibles, and if any one said he chose them he would
be thought silly; but there may be a wish even for impossibles, e.g.
for immortality. And wish may relate to things that could in no way
be brought about by one's own efforts, e.g. that a particular actor
or athlete should win in a competition; but no one chooses such things,
but only the things that he thinks could be brought about by his own
efforts. Again, wish relates rather to the end, choice to the means;
for instance, we wish to be healthy, but we choose the acts which
will make us healthy, and we wish to be happy and say we do, but we
cannot well say we choose to be so; for, in general, choice seems
to relate to the things that are in our own power. 

For this reason, too, it cannot be opinion; for opinion is thought
to relate to all kinds of things, no less to eternal things and impossible
things than to things in our own power; and it is distinguished by
its falsity or truth, not by its badness or goodness, while choice
is distinguished rather by these. 

Now with opinion in general perhaps no one even says it is identical.
But it is not identical even with any kind of opinion; for by choosing
what is good or bad we are men of a certain character, which we are
not by holding certain opinions. And we choose to get or avoid something
good or bad, but we have opinions about what a thing is or whom it
is good for or how it is good for him; we can hardly be said to opine
to get or avoid anything. And choice is praised for being related
to the right object rather than for being rightly related to it, opinion
for being truly related to its object. And we choose what we best
know to be good, but we opine what we do not quite know; and it is
not the same people that are thought to make the best choices and
to have the best opinions, but some are thought to have fairly good
opinions, but by reason of vice to choose what they should not. If
opinion precedes choice or accompanies it, that makes no difference;
for it is not this that we are considering, but whether it is identical
with some kind of opinion. 

What, then, or what kind of thing is it, since it is none of the things
we have mentioned? It seems to be voluntary, but not all that is voluntary
to be an object of choice. Is it, then, what has been decided on by
previous deliberation? At any rate choice involves a rational principle
and thought. Even the name seems to suggest that it is what is chosen
before other things. 

3 

Do we deliberate about everything, and is everything a possible subject
of deliberation, or is deliberation impossible about some things?
We ought presumably to call not what a fool or a madman would deliberate
about, but what a sensible man would deliberate about, a subject of
deliberation. Now about eternal things no one deliberates, e.g. about
the material universe or the incommensurability of the diagonal and
the side of a square. But no more do we deliberate about the things
that involve movement but always happen in the same way, whether of
necessity or by nature or from any other cause, e.g. the solstices
and the risings of the stars; nor about things that happen now in
one way, now in another, e.g. droughts and rains; nor about chance
events, like the finding of treasure. But we do not deliberate even
about all human affairs; for instance, no Spartan deliberates about
the best constitution for the Scythians. For none of these things
can be brought about by our own efforts. 

We deliberate about things that are in our power and can be done;
and these are in fact what is left. For nature, necessity, and chance
are thought to be causes, and also reason and everything that depends
on man. Now every class of men deliberates about the things that can
be done by their own efforts. And in the case of exact and self-contained
sciences there is no deliberation, e.g. about the letters of the alphabet
(for we have no doubt how they should be written); but the things
that are brought about by our own efforts, but not always in the same
way, are the things about which we deliberate, e.g. questions of medical
treatment or of money-making. And we do so more in the case of the
art of navigation than in that of gymnastics, inasmuch as it has been
less exactly worked out, and again about other things in the same
ratio, and more also in the case of the arts than in that of the sciences;
for we have more doubt about the former. Deliberation is concerned
with things that happen in a certain way for the most part, but in
which the event is obscure, and with things in which it is indeterminate.
We call in others to aid us in deliberation on important questions,
distrusting ourselves as not being equal to deciding. 

We deliberate not about ends but about means. For a doctor does not
deliberate whether he shall heal, nor an orator whether he shall persuade,
nor a statesman whether he shall produce law and order, nor does any
one else deliberate about his end. They assume the end and consider
how and by what means it is to be attained; and if it seems to be
produced by several means they consider by which it is most easily
and best produced, while if it is achieved by one only they consider
how it will be achieved by this and by what means this will be achieved,
till they come to the first cause, which in the order of discovery
is last. For the person who deliberates seems to investigate and analyse
in the way described as though he were analysing a geometrical construction
(not all investigation appears to be deliberation- for instance mathematical
investigations- but all deliberation is investigation), and what is
last in the order of analysis seems to be first in the order of becoming.
And if we come on an impossibility, we give up the search, e.g. if
we need money and this cannot be got; but if a thing appears possible
we try to do it. By 'possible' things I mean things that might be
brought about by our own efforts; and these in a sense include things
that can be brought about by the efforts of our friends, since the
moving principle is in ourselves. The subject of investigation is
sometimes the instruments, sometimes the use of them; and similarly
in the other cases- sometimes the means, sometimes the mode of using
it or the means of bringing it about. It seems, then, as has been
said, that man is a moving principle of actions; now deliberation
is about the things to be done by the agent himself, and actions are
for the sake of things other than themselves. For the end cannot be
a subject of deliberation, but only the means; nor indeed can the
particular facts be a subject of it, as whether this is bread or has
been baked as it should; for these are matters of perception. If we
are to be always deliberating, we shall have to go on to infinity.

The same thing is deliberated upon and is chosen, except that the
object of choice is already determinate, since it is that which has
been decided upon as a result of deliberation that is the object of
choice. For every one ceases to inquire how he is to act when he has
brought the moving principle back to himself and to the ruling part
of himself; for this is what chooses. This is plain also from the
ancient constitutions, which Homer represented; for the kings announced
their choices to the people. The object of choice being one of the
things in our own power which is desired after deliberation, choice
will be deliberate desire of things in our own power; for when we
have decided as a result of deliberation, we desire in accordance
with our deliberation. 

We may take it, then, that we have described choice in outline, and
stated the nature of its objects and the fact that it is concerned
with means. 

4 

That wish is for the end has already been stated; some think it is
for the good, others for the apparent good. Now those who say that
the good is the object of wish must admit in consequence that that
which the man who does not choose aright wishes for is not an object
of wish (for if it is to be so, it must also be good; but it was,
if it so happened, bad); while those who say the apparent good is
the object of wish must admit that there is no natural object of wish,
but only what seems good to each man. Now different things appear
good to different people, and, if it so happens, even contrary things.

If these consequences are unpleasing, are we to say that absolutely
and in truth the good is the object of wish, but for each person the
apparent good; that that which is in truth an object of wish is an
object of wish to the good man, while any chance thing may be so the
bad man, as in the case of bodies also the things that are in truth
wholesome are wholesome for bodies which are in good condition, while
for those that are diseased other things are wholesome- or bitter
or sweet or hot or heavy, and so on; since the good man judges each
class of things rightly, and in each the truth appears to him? For
each state of character has its own ideas of the noble and the pleasant,
and perhaps the good man differs from others most by seeing the truth
in each class of things, being as it were the norm and measure of
them. In most things the error seems to be due to pleasure; for it
appears a good when it is not. We therefore choose the pleasant as
a good, and avoid pain as an evil. 

5 

The end, then, being what we wish for, the means what we deliberate
about and choose, actions concerning means must be according to choice
and voluntary. Now the exercise of the virtues is concerned with means.
Therefore virtue also is in our own power, and so too vice. For where
it is in our power to act it is also in our power not to act, and
vice versa; so that, if to act, where this is noble, is in our power,
not to act, which will be base, will also be in our power, and if
not to act, where this is noble, is in our power, to act, which will
be base, will also be in our power. Now if it is in our power to do
noble or base acts, and likewise in our power not to do them, and
this was what being good or bad meant, then it is in our power to
be virtuous or vicious. 

The saying that 'no one is voluntarily wicked nor involuntarily happy'
seems to be partly false and partly true; for no one is involuntarily
happy, but wickedness is voluntary. Or else we shall have to dispute
what has just been said, at any rate, and deny that man is a moving
principle or begetter of his actions as of children. But if these
facts are evident and we cannot refer actions to moving principles
other than those in ourselves, the acts whose moving principles are
in us must themselves also be in our power and voluntary.

Witness seems to be borne to this both by individuals in their private
capacity and by legislators themselves; for these punish and take
vengeance on those who do wicked acts (unless they have acted under
compulsion or as a result of ignorance for which they are not themselves
responsible), while they honour those who do noble acts, as though
they meant to encourage the latter and deter the former. But no one
is encouraged to do the things that are neither in our power nor voluntary;
it is assumed that there is no gain in being persuaded not to be hot
or in pain or hungry or the like, since we shall experience these
feelings none the less. Indeed, we punish a man for his very ignorance,
if he is thought responsible for the ignorance, as when penalties
are doubled in the case of drunkenness; for the moving principle is
in the man himself, since he had the power of not getting drunk and
his getting drunk was the cause of his ignorance. And we punish those
who are ignorant of anything in the laws that they ought to know and
that is not difficult, and so too in the case of anything else that
they are thought to be ignorant of through carelessness; we assume
that it is in their power not to be ignorant, since they have the
power of taking care. 

But perhaps a man is the kind of man not to take care. Still they
are themselves by their slack lives responsible for becoming men of
that kind, and men make themselves responsible for being unjust or
self-indulgent, in the one case by cheating and in the other by spending
their time in drinking bouts and the like; for it is activities exercised
on particular objects that make the corresponding character. This
is plain from the case of people training for any contest or action;
they practise the activity the whole time. Now not to know that it
is from the exercise of activities on particular objects that states
of character are produced is the mark of a thoroughly senseless person.
Again, it is irrational to suppose that a man who acts unjustly does
not wish to be unjust or a man who acts self-indulgently to be self-indulgent.
But if without being ignorant a man does the things which will make
him unjust, he will be unjust voluntarily. Yet it does not follow
that if he wishes he will cease to be unjust and will be just. For
neither does the man who is ill become well on those terms. We may
suppose a case in which he is ill voluntarily, through living incontinently
and disobeying his doctors. In that case it was then open to him not
to be ill, but not now, when he has thrown away his chance, just as
when you have let a stone go it is too late to recover it; but yet
it was in your power to throw it, since the moving principle was in
you. So, too, to the unjust and to the self-indulgent man it was open
at the beginning not to become men of this kind, and so they are unjust
and selfindulgent voluntarily; but now that they have become so it
is not possible for them not to be so. 

But not only are the vices of the soul voluntary, but those of the
body also for some men, whom we accordingly blame; while no one blames
those who are ugly by nature, we blame those who are so owing to want
of exercise and care. So it is, too, with respect to weakness and
infirmity; no one would reproach a man blind from birth or by disease
or from a blow, but rather pity him, while every one would blame a
man who was blind from drunkenness or some other form of self-indulgence.
Of vices of the body, then, those in our own power are blamed, those
not in our power are not. And if this be so, in the other cases also
the vices that are blamed must be in our own power. 

Now some one may say that all men desire the apparent good, but have
no control over the appearance, but the end appears to each man in
a form answering to his character. We reply that if each man is somehow
responsible for his state of mind, he will also be himself somehow
responsible for the appearance; but if not, no one is responsible
for his own evildoing, but every one does evil acts through ignorance
of the end, thinking that by these he will get what is best, and the
aiming at the end is not self-chosen but one must be born with an
eye, as it were, by which to judge rightly and choose what is truly
good, and he is well endowed by nature who is well endowed with this.
For it is what is greatest and most noble, and what we cannot get
or learn from another, but must have just such as it was when given
us at birth, and to be well and nobly endowed with this will be perfect
and true excellence of natural endowment. If this is true, then, how
will virtue be more voluntary than vice? To both men alike, the good
and the bad, the end appears and is fixed by nature or however it
may be, and it is by referring everything else to this that men do
whatever they do. 

Whether, then, it is not by nature that the end appears to each man
such as it does appear, but something also depends on him, or the
end is natural but because the good man adopts the means voluntarily
virtue is voluntary, vice also will be none the less voluntary; for
in the case of the bad man there is equally present that which depends
on himself in his actions even if not in his end. If, then, as is
asserted, the virtues are voluntary (for we are ourselves somehow
partly responsible for our states of character, and it is by being
persons of a certain kind that we assume the end to be so and so),
the vices also will be voluntary; for the same is true of them.

With regard to the virtues in general we have stated their genus in
outline, viz. that they are means and that they are states of character,
and that they tend, and by their own nature, to the doing of the acts
by which they are produced, and that they are in our power and voluntary,
and act as the right rule prescribes. But actions and states of character
are not voluntary in the same way; for we are masters of our actions
from the beginning right to the end, if we know the particular facts,
but though we control the beginning of our states of character the
gradual progress is not obvious any more than it is in illnesses;
because it was in our power, however, to act in this way or not in
this way, therefore the states are voluntary. 

Let us take up the several virtues, however, and say which they are
and what sort of things they are concerned with and how they are concerned
with them; at the same time it will become plain how many they are.
And first let us speak of courage. 

6 

That it is a mean with regard to feelings of fear and confidence has
already been made evident; and plainly the things we fear are terrible
things, and these are, to speak without qualification, evils; for
which reason people even define fear as expectation of evil. Now we
fear all evils, e.g. disgrace, poverty, disease, friendlessness, death,
but the brave man is not thought to be concerned with all; for to
fear some things is even right and noble, and it is base not to fear
them- e.g. disgrace; he who fears this is good and modest, and he
who does not is shameless. He is, however, by some people called brave,
by a transference of the word to a new meaning; for he has in him
something which is like the brave man, since the brave man also is
a fearless person. Poverty and disease we perhaps ought not to fear,
nor in general the things that do not proceed from vice and are not
due to a man himself. But not even the man who is fearless of these
is brave. Yet we apply the word to him also in virtue of a similarity;
for some who in the dangers of war are cowards are liberal and are
confident in face of the loss of money. Nor is a man a coward if he
fears insult to his wife and children or envy or anything of the kind;
nor brave if he is confident when he is about to be flogged. With
what sort of terrible things, then, is the brave man concerned? Surely
with the greatest; for no one is more likely than he to stand his
ground against what is awe-inspiring. Now death is the most terrible
of all things; for it is the end, and nothing is thought to be any
longer either good or bad for the dead. But the brave man would not
seem to be concerned even with death in all circumstances, e.g. at
sea or in disease. In what circumstances, then? Surely in the noblest.
Now such deaths are those in battle; for these take place in the greatest
and noblest danger. And these are correspondingly honoured in city-states
and at the courts of monarchs. Properly, then, he will be called brave
who is fearless in face of a noble death, and of all emergencies that
involve death; and the emergencies of war are in the highest degree
of this kind. Yet at sea also, and in disease, the brave man is fearless,
but not in the same way as the seaman; for he has given up hope of
safety, and is disliking the thought of death in this shape, while
they are hopeful because of their experience. At the same time, we
show courage in situations where there is the opportunity of showing
prowess or where death is noble; but in these forms of death neither
of these conditions is fulfilled. 

7 

What is terrible is not the same for all men; but we say there are
things terrible even beyond human strength. These, then, are terrible
to every one- at least to every sensible man; but the terrible things
that are not beyond human strength differ in magnitude and degree,
and so too do the things that inspire confidence. Now the brave man
is as dauntless as man may be. Therefore, while he will fear even
the things that are not beyond human strength, he will face them as
he ought and as the rule directs, for honour's sake; for this is the
end of virtue. But it is possible to fear these more, or less, and
again to fear things that are not terrible as if they were. Of the
faults that are committed one consists in fearing what one should
not, another in fearing as we should not, another in fearing when
we should not, and so on; and so too with respect to the things that
inspire confidence. The man, then, who faces and who fears the right
things and from the right motive, in the right way and from the right
time, and who feels confidence under the corresponding conditions,
is brave; for the brave man feels and acts according to the merits
of the case and in whatever way the rule directs. Now the end of every
activity is conformity to the corresponding state of character. This
is true, therefore, of the brave man as well as of others. But courage
is noble. Therefore the end also is noble; for each thing is defined
by its end. Therefore it is for a noble end that the brave man endures
and acts as courage directs. 

Of those who go to excess he who exceeds in fearlessness has no name
(we have said previously that many states of character have no names),
but he would be a sort of madman or insensible person if he feared
nothing, neither earthquakes nor the waves, as they say the Celts
do not; while the man who exceeds in confidence about what really
is terrible is rash. The rash man, however, is also thought to be
boastful and only a pretender to courage; at all events, as the brave
man is with regard to what is terrible, so the rash man wishes to
appear; and so he imitates him in situations where he can. Hence also
most of them are a mixture of rashness and cowardice; for, while in
these situations they display confidence, they do not hold their ground
against what is really terrible. The man who exceeds in fear is a
coward; for he fears both what he ought not and as he ought not, and
all the similar characterizations attach to him. He is lacking also
in confidence; but he is more conspicuous for his excess of fear in
painful situations. The coward, then, is a despairing sort of person;
for he fears everything. The brave man, on the other hand, has the
opposite disposition; for confidence is the mark of a hopeful disposition.
The coward, the rash man, and the brave man, then, are concerned with
the same objects but are differently disposed towards them; for the
first two exceed and fall short, while the third holds the middle,
which is the right, position; and rash men are precipitate, and wish
for dangers beforehand but draw back when they are in them, while
brave men are keen in the moment of action, but quiet beforehand.

As we have said, then, courage is a mean with respect to things that
inspire confidence or fear, in the circumstances that have been stated;
and it chooses or endures things because it is noble to do so, or
because it is base not to do so. But to die to escape from poverty
or love or anything painful is not the mark of a brave man, but rather
of a coward; for it is softness to fly from what is troublesome, and
such a man endures death not because it is noble but to fly from evil.

8 

Courage, then, is something of this sort, but the name is also applied
to five other kinds. 

First comes the courage of the citizen-soldier; for this is most like
true courage. Citizen-soldiers seem to face dangers because of the
penalties imposed by the laws and the reproaches they would otherwise
incur, and because of the honours they win by such action; and therefore
those peoples seem to be bravest among whom cowards are held in dishonour
and brave men in honour. This is the kind of courage that Homer depicts,
e.g. in Diomede and in Hector: 

First will Polydamas be to heap reproach on me then; and

For Hector one day 'mid the Trojans shall utter his vaulting

harangue: 
Afraid was Tydeides, and fled from my face. 

This kind of courage is most like to that which we described earlier,
because it is due to virtue; for it is due to shame and to desire
of a noble object (i.e. honour) and avoidance of disgrace, which is
ignoble. One might rank in the same class even those who are compelled
by their rulers; but they are inferior, inasmuch as they do what they
do not from shame but from fear, and to avoid not what is disgraceful
but what is painful; for their masters compel them, as Hector does:

But if I shall spy any dastard that cowers far from the fight,

Vainly will such an one hope to escape from the dogs. 

And those who give them their posts, and beat them if they retreat,
do the same, and so do those who draw them up with trenches or something
of the sort behind them; all of these apply compulsion. But one ought
to be brave not under compulsion but because it is noble to be so.

(2) Experience with regard to particular facts is also thought to
be courage; this is indeed the reason why Socrates thought courage
was knowledge. Other people exhibit this quality in other dangers,
and professional soldiers exhibit it in the dangers of war; for there
seem to be many empty alarms in war, of which these have had the most
comprehensive experience; therefore they seem brave, because the others
do not know the nature of the facts. Again, their experience makes
them most capable in attack and in defence, since they can use their
arms and have the kind that are likely to be best both for attack
and for defence; therefore they fight like armed men against unarmed
or like trained athletes against amateurs; for in such contests too
it is not the bravest men that fight best, but those who are strongest
and have their bodies in the best condition. Professional soldiers
turn cowards, however, when the danger puts too great a strain on
them and they are inferior in numbers and equipment; for they are
the first to fly, while citizen-forces die at their posts, as in fact
happened at the temple of Hermes. For to the latter flight is disgraceful
and death is preferable to safety on those terms; while the former
from the very beginning faced the danger on the assumption that they
were stronger, and when they know the facts they fly, fearing death
more than disgrace; but the brave man is not that sort of person.

(3) Passion also is sometimes reckoned as courage; those who act from
passion, like wild beasts rushing at those who have wounded them,
are thought to be brave, because brave men also are passionate; for
passion above all things is eager to rush on danger, and hence Homer's
'put strength into his passion' and 'aroused their spirit and passion
and 'hard he breathed panting' and 'his blood boiled'. For all such
expressions seem to indicate the stirring and onset of passion. Now
brave men act for honour's sake, but passion aids them; while wild
beasts act under the influence of pain; for they attack because they
have been wounded or because they are afraid, since if they are in
a forest they do not come near one. Thus they are not brave because,
driven by pain and passion, they rush on danger without foreseeing
any of the perils, since at that rate even asses would be brave when
they are hungry; for blows will not drive them from their food; and
lust also makes adulterers do many daring things. (Those creatures
are not brave, then, which are driven on to danger by pain or passion.)
The 'courage' that is due to passion seems to be the most natural,
and to be courage if choice and motive be added. 

Men, then, as well as beasts, suffer pain when they are angry, and
are pleased when they exact their revenge; those who fight for these
reasons, however, are pugnacious but not brave; for they do not act
for honour's sake nor as the rule directs, but from strength of feeling;
they have, however, something akin to courage. 

(4) Nor are sanguine people brave; for they are confident in danger
only because they have conquered often and against many foes. Yet
they closely resemble brave men, because both are confident; but brave
men are confident for the reasons stated earlier, while these are
so because they think they are the strongest and can suffer nothing.
(Drunken men also behave in this way; they become sanguine). When
their adventures do not succeed, however, they run away; but it was
the mark of a brave man to face things that are, and seem, terrible
for a man, because it is noble to do so and disgraceful not to do
so. Hence also it is thought the mark of a braver man to be fearless
and undisturbed in sudden alarms than to be so in those that are foreseen;
for it must have proceeded more from a state of character, because
less from preparation; acts that are foreseen may be chosen by calculation
and rule, but sudden actions must be in accordance with one's state
of character. 

(5) People who are ignorant of the danger also appear brave, and they
are not far removed from those of a sanguine temper, but are inferior
inasmuch as they have no self-reliance while these have. Hence also
the sanguine hold their ground for a time; but those who have been
deceived about the facts fly if they know or suspect that these are
different from what they supposed, as happened to the Argives when
they fell in with the Spartans and took them for Sicyonians.

We have, then, described the character both of brave men and of those
who are thought to be brave. 

9 

Though courage is concerned with feelings of confidence and of fear,
it is not concerned with both alike, but more with the things that
inspire fear; for he who is undisturbed in face of these and bears
himself as he should towards these is more truly brave than the man
who does so towards the things that inspire confidence. It is for
facing what is painful, then, as has been said, that men are called
brave. Hence also courage involves pain, and is justly praised; for
it is harder to face what is painful than to abstain from what is
pleasant. 

Yet the end which courage sets before it would seem to be pleasant,
but to be concealed by the attending circumstances, as happens also
in athletic contests; for the end at which boxers aim is pleasant-
the crown and the honours- but the blows they take are distressing
to flesh and blood, and painful, and so is their whole exertion; and
because the blows and the exertions are many the end, which is but
small, appears to have nothing pleasant in it. And so, if the case
of courage is similar, death and wounds will be painful to the brave
man and against his will, but he will face them because it is noble
to do so or because it is base not to do so. And the more he is possessed
of virtue in its entirety and the happier he is, the more he will
be pained at the thought of death; for life is best worth living for
such a man, and he is knowingly losing the greatest goods, and this
is painful. But he is none the less brave, and perhaps all the more
so, because he chooses noble deeds of war at that cost. It is not
the case, then, with all the virtues that the exercise of them is
pleasant, except in so far as it reaches its end. But it is quite
possible that the best soldiers may be not men of this sort but those
who are less brave but have no other good; for these are ready to
face danger, and they sell their life for trifling gains.

So much, then, for courage; it is not difficult to grasp its nature
in outline, at any rate, from what has been said. 

10 

After courage let us speak of temperance; for these seem to be the
virtues of the irrational parts. We have said that temperance is a
mean with regard to pleasures (for it is less, and not in the same
way, concerned with pains); self-indulgence also is manifested in
the same sphere. Now, therefore, let us determine with what sort of
pleasures they are concerned. We may assume the distinction between
bodily pleasures and those of the soul, such as love of honour and
love of learning; for the lover of each of these delights in that
of which he is a lover, the body being in no way affected, but rather
the mind; but men who are concerned with such pleasures are called
neither temperate nor self-indulgent. Nor, again, are those who are
concerned with the other pleasures that are not bodily; for those
who are fond of hearing and telling stories and who spend their days
on anything that turns up are called gossips, but not self-indulgent,
nor are those who are pained at the loss of money or of friends.

Temperance must be concerned with bodily pleasures, but not all even
of these; for those who delight in objects of vision, such as colours
and shapes and painting, are called neither temperate nor self-indulgent;
yet it would seem possible to delight even in these either as one
should or to excess or to a deficient degree. 

And so too is it with objects of hearing; no one calls those who delight
extravagantly in music or acting self-indulgent, nor those who do
so as they ought temperate. 

Nor do we apply these names to those who delight in odour, unless
it be incidentally; we do not call those self-indulgent who delight
in the odour of apples or roses or incense, but rather those who delight
in the odour of unguents or of dainty dishes; for self-indulgent people
delight in these because these remind them of the objects of their
appetite. And one may see even other people, when they are hungry,
delighting in the smell of food; but to delight in this kind of thing
is the mark of the self-indulgent man; for these are objects of appetite
to him. 

Nor is there in animals other than man any pleasure connected with
these senses, except incidentally. For dogs do not delight in the
scent of hares, but in the eating of them, but the scent told them
the hares were there; nor does the lion delight in the lowing of the
ox, but in eating it; but he perceived by the lowing that it was near,
and therefore appears to delight in the lowing; and similarly he does
not delight because he sees 'a stag or a wild goat', but because he
is going to make a meal of it. Temperance and self-indulgence, however,
are concerned with the kind of pleasures that the other animals share
in, which therefore appear slavish and brutish; these are touch and
taste. But even of taste they appear to make little or no use; for
the business of taste is the discriminating of flavours, which is
done by winetasters and people who season dishes; but they hardly
take pleasure in making these discriminations, or at least self-indulgent
people do not, but in the actual enjoyment, which in all cases comes
through touch, both in the case of food and in that of drink and in
that of sexual intercourse. This is why a certain gourmand prayed
that his throat might become longer than a crane's, implying that
it was the contact that he took pleasure in. Thus the sense with which
self-indulgence is connected is the most widely shared of the senses;
and self-indulgence would seem to be justly a matter of reproach,
because it attaches to us not as men but as animals. To delight in
such things, then, and to love them above all others, is brutish.
For even of the pleasures of touch the most liberal have been eliminated,
e.g. those produced in the gymnasium by rubbing and by the consequent
heat; for the contact characteristic of the self-indulgent man does
not affect the whole body but only certain parts. 

11 

Of the appetites some seem to be common, others to be peculiar to
individuals and acquired; e.g. the appetite for food is natural, since
every one who is without it craves for food or drink, and sometimes
for both, and for love also (as Homer says) if he is young and lusty;
but not every one craves for this or that kind of nourishment or love,
nor for the same things. Hence such craving appears to be our very
own. Yet it has of course something natural about it; for different
things are pleasant to different kinds of people, and some things
are more pleasant to every one than chance objects. Now in the natural
appetites few go wrong, and only in one direction, that of excess;
for to eat or drink whatever offers itself till one is surfeited is
to exceed the natural amount, since natural appetite is the replenishment
of one's deficiency. Hence these people are called belly-gods, this
implying that they fill their belly beyond what is right. It is people
of entirely slavish character that become like this. But with regard
to the pleasures peculiar to individuals many people go wrong and
in many ways. For while the people who are 'fond of so and so' are
so called because they delight either in the wrong things, or more
than most people do, or in the wrong way, the self-indulgent exceed
in all three ways; they both delight in some things that they ought
not to delight in (since they are hateful), and if one ought to delight
in some of the things they delight in, they do so more than one ought
and than most men do. 

Plainly, then, excess with regard to pleasures is self-indulgence
and is culpable; with regard to pains one is not, as in the case of
courage, called temperate for facing them or self-indulgent for not
doing so, but the selfindulgent man is so called because he is pained
more than he ought at not getting pleasant things (even his pain being
caused by pleasure), and the temperate man is so called because he
is not pained at the absence of what is pleasant and at his abstinence
from it. 

The self-indulgent man, then, craves for all pleasant things or those
that are most pleasant, and is led by his appetite to choose these
at the cost of everything else; hence he is pained both when he fails
to get them and when he is merely craving for them (for appetite involves
pain); but it seems absurd to be pained for the sake of pleasure.
People who fall short with regard to pleasures and delight in them
less than they should are hardly found; for such insensibility is
not human. Even the other animals distinguish different kinds of food
and enjoy some and not others; and if there is any one who finds nothing
pleasant and nothing more attractive than anything else, he must be
something quite different from a man; this sort of person has not
received a name because he hardly occurs. The temperate man occupies
a middle position with regard to these objects. For he neither enjoys
the things that the self-indulgent man enjoys most-but rather dislikes
them-nor in general the things that he should not, nor anything of
this sort to excess, nor does he feel pain or craving when they are
absent, or does so only to a moderate degree, and not more than he
should, nor when he should not, and so on; but the things that, being
pleasant, make for health or for good condition, he will desire moderately
and as he should, and also other pleasant things if they are not hindrances
to these ends, or contrary to what is noble, or beyond his means.
For he who neglects these conditions loves such pleasures more than
they are worth, but the temperate man is not that sort of person,
but the sort of person that the right rule prescribes. 

12 

Self-indulgence is more like a voluntary state than cowardice. For
the former is actuated by pleasure, the latter by pain, of which the
one is to be chosen and the other to be avoided; and pain upsets and
destroys the nature of the person who feels it, while pleasure does
nothing of the sort. Therefore self-indulgence is more voluntary.
Hence also it is more a matter of reproach; for it is easier to become
accustomed to its objects, since there are many things of this sort
in life, and the process of habituation to them is free from danger,
while with terrible objects the reverse is the case. But cowardice
would seem to be voluntary in a different degree from its particular
manifestations; for it is itself painless, but in these we are upset
by pain, so that we even throw down our arms and disgrace ourselves
in other ways; hence our acts are even thought to be done under compulsion.
For the self-indulgent man, on the other hand, the particular acts
are voluntary (for he does them with craving and desire), but the
whole state is less so; for no one craves to be self-indulgent.

The name self-indulgence is applied also to childish faults; for they
bear a certain resemblance to what we have been considering. Which
is called after which, makes no difference to our present purpose;
plainly, however, the later is called after the earlier. The transference
of the name seems not a bad one; for that which desires what is base
and which develops quickly ought to be kept in a chastened condition,
and these characteristics belong above all to appetite and to the
child, since children in fact live at the beck and call of appetite,
and it is in them that the desire for what is pleasant is strongest.
If, then, it is not going to be obedient and subject to the ruling
principle, it will go to great lengths; for in an irrational being
the desire for pleasure is insatiable even if it tries every source
of gratification, and the exercise of appetite increases its innate
force, and if appetites are strong and violent they even expel the
power of calculation. Hence they should be moderate and few, and should
in no way oppose the rational principle-and this is what we call an
obedient and chastened state-and as the child should live according
to the direction of his tutor, so the appetitive element should live
according to rational principle. Hence the appetitive element in a
temperate man should harmonize with the rational principle; for the
noble is the mark at which both aim, and the temperate man craves
for the things be ought, as he ought, as when he ought; and when he
ought; and this is what rational principle directs. 

Here we conclude our account of temperance. 



BOOK IV

1 

Let us speak next of liberality. It seems to be the mean with regard
to wealth; for the liberal man is praised not in respect of military
matters, nor of those in respect of which the temrate man is praised,
nor of judicial decisions, but with regard to the giving and taking
of wealth, and especially in respect of giving. Now by 'wealth' we
mean all the things whose value is measured by money. Further, prodigality
and meanness are excesses and defects with regard to wealth; and meanness
we always impute to those who care more than they ought for wealth,
but we sometimes apply the word 'prodigality' in a complex sense;
for we call those men prodigals who are incontinent and spend money
on self-indulgence. Hence also they are thought the poorest characters;
for they combine more vices than one. Therefore the application of
the word to them is not its proper use; for a 'prodigal' means a man
who has a single evil quality, that of wasting his substance; since
a prodigal is one who is being ruined by his own fault, and the wasting
of substance is thought to be a sort of ruining of oneself, life being
held to depend on possession of substance. 

This, then, is the sense in which we take the word 'prodigality'.
Now the things that have a use may be used either well or badly; and
riches is a useful thing; and everything is used best by the man who
has the virtue concerned with it; riches, therefore, will be used
best by the man who has the virtue concerned with wealth; and this
is the liberal man. Now spending and giving seem to be the using of
wealth; taking and keeping rather the possession of it. Hence it is
more the mark of the liberal man to give to the right people than
to take from the right sources and not to take from the wrong. For
it is more characteristic of virtue to do good than to have good done
to one, and more characteristic to do what is noble than not to do
what is base; and it is not hard to see that giving implies doing
good and doing what is noble, and taking implies having good done
to one or not acting basely. And gratitude is felt towards him who
gives, not towards him who does not take, and praise also is bestowed
more on him. It is easier, also, not to take than to give; for men
are apter to give away their own too little than to take what is another's.
Givers, too, are called liberal; but those who do not take are not
praised for liberality but rather for justice; while those who take
are hardly praised at all. And the liberal are almost the most loved
of all virtuous characters, since they are useful; and this depends
on their giving. 

Now virtuous actions are noble and done for the sake of the noble.
Therefore the liberal man, like other virtuous men, will give for
the sake of the noble, and rightly; for he will give to the right
people, the right amounts, and at the right time, with all the other
qualifications that accompany right giving; and that too with pleasure
or without pain; for that which is virtuous is pleasant or free from
pain-least of all will it be painful. But he who gives to the wrong
people or not for the sake of the noble but for some other cause,
will be called not liberal but by some other name. Nor is he liberal
who gives with pain; for he would prefer the wealth to the noble act,
and this is not characteristic of a liberal man. But no more will
the liberal man take from wrong sources; for such taking is not characteristic
of the man who sets no store by wealth. Nor will he be a ready asker;
for it is not characteristic of a man who confers benefits to accept
them lightly. But he will take from the right sources, e.g. from his
own possessions, not as something noble but as a necessity, that he
may have something to give. Nor will he neglect his own property,
since he wishes by means of this to help others. And he will refrain
from giving to anybody and everybody, that he may have something to
give to the right people, at the right time, and where it is noble
to do so. It is highly characteristic of a liberal man also to go
to excess in giving, so that he leaves too little for himself; for
it is the nature of a liberal man not to look to himself. The term
'liberality' is used relatively to a man's substance; for liberality
resides not in the multitude of the gifts but in the state of character
of the giver, and this is relative to the giver's substance. There
is therefore nothing to prevent the man who gives less from being
the more liberal man, if he has less to give those are thought to
be more liberal who have not made their wealth but inherited it; for
in the first place they have no experience of want, and secondly all
men are fonder of their own productions, as are parents and poets.
It is not easy for the liberal man to be rich, since he is not apt
either at taking or at keeping, but at giving away, and does not value
wealth for its own sake but as a means to giving. Hence comes the
charge that is brought against fortune, that those who deserve riches
most get it least. But it is not unreasonable that it should turn
out so; for he cannot have wealth, any more than anything else, if
he does not take pains to have it. Yet he will not give to the wrong
people nor at the wrong time, and so on; for he would no longer be
acting in accordance with liberality, and if he spent on these objects
he would have nothing to spend on the right objects. For, as has been
said, he is liberal who spends according to his substance and on the
right objects; and he who exceeds is prodigal. Hence we do not call
despots prodigal; for it is thought not easy for them to give and
spend beyond the amount of their possessions. Liberality, then, being
a mean with regard to giving and taking of wealth, the liberal man
will both give and spend the right amounts and on the right objects,
alike in small things and in great, and that with pleasure; he will
also take the right amounts and from the right sources. For, the virtue
being a mean with regard to both, he will do both as he ought; since
this sort of taking accompanies proper giving, and that which is not
of this sort is contrary to it, and accordingly the giving and taking
that accompany each other are present together in the same man, while
the contrary kinds evidently are not. But if he happens to spend in
a manner contrary to what is right and noble, he will be pained, but
moderately and as he ought; for it is the mark of virtue both to be
pleased and to be pained at the right objects and in the right way.
Further, the liberal man is easy to deal with in money matters; for
he can be got the better of, since he sets no store by money, and
is more annoyed if he has not spent something that he ought than pained
if he has spent something that he ought not, and does not agree with
the saying of Simonides. 

The prodigal errs in these respects also; for he is neither pleased
nor pained at the right things or in the right way; this will be more
evident as we go on. We have said that prodigality and meanness are
excesses and deficiencies, and in two things, in giving and in taking;
for we include spending under giving. Now prodigality exceeds in giving
and not taking, while meanness falls short in giving, and exceeds
in taking, except in small things. 

The characteristics of prodigality are not often combined; for it
is not easy to give to all if you take from none; private persons
soon exhaust their substance with giving, and it is to these that
the name of prodigals is applied- though a man of this sort would
seem to be in no small degree better than a mean man. For he is easily
cured both by age and by poverty, and thus he may move towards the
middle state. For he has the characteristics of the liberal man, since
he both gives and refrains from taking, though he does neither of
these in the right manner or well. Therefore if he were brought to
do so by habituation or in some other way, he would be liberal; for
he will then give to the right people, and will not take from the
wrong sources. This is why he is thought to have not a bad character;
it is not the mark of a wicked or ignoble man to go to excess in giving
and not taking, but only of a foolish one. The man who is prodigal
in this way is thought much better than the mean man both for the
aforesaid reasons and because he benefits many while the other benefits
no one, not even himself. 

But most prodigal people, as has been said, also take from the wrong
sources, and are in this respect mean. They become apt to take because
they wish to spend and cannot do this easily; for their possessions
soon run short. Thus they are forced to provide means from some other
source. At the same time, because they care nothing for honour, they
take recklessly and from any source; for they have an appetite for
giving, and they do not mind how or from what source. Hence also their
giving is not liberal; for it is not noble, nor does it aim at nobility,
nor is it done in the right way; sometimes they make rich those who
should be poor, and will give nothing to people of respectable character,
and much to flatterers or those who provide them with some other pleasure.
Hence also most of them are self-indulgent; for they spend lightly
and waste money on their indulgences, and incline towards pleasures
because they do not live with a view to what is noble. 

The prodigal man, then, turns into what we have described if he is
left untutored, but if he is treated with care he will arrive at the
intermediate and right state. But meanness is both incurable (for
old age and every disability is thought to make men mean) and more
innate in men than prodigality; for most men are fonder of getting
money than of giving. It also extends widely, and is multiform, since
there seem to be many kinds of meanness. 

For it consists in two things, deficiency in giving and excess in
taking, and is not found complete in all men but is sometimes divided;
some men go to excess in taking, others fall short in giving. Those
who are called by such names as 'miserly', 'close', 'stingy', all
fall short in giving, but do not covet the possessions of others nor
wish to get them. In some this is due to a sort of honesty and avoidance
of what is disgraceful (for some seem, or at least profess, to hoard
their money for this reason, that they may not some day be forced
to do something disgraceful; to this class belong the cheeseparer
and every one of the sort; he is so called from his excess of unwillingness
to give anything); while others again keep their hands off the property
of others from fear, on the ground that it is not easy, if one takes
the property of others oneself, to avoid having one's own taken by
them; they are therefore content neither to take nor to give.

Others again exceed in respect of taking by taking anything and from
any source, e.g. those who ply sordid trades, pimps and all such people,
and those who lend small sums and at high rates. For all of these
take more than they ought and from wrong sources. What is common to
them is evidently sordid love of gain; they all put up with a bad
name for the sake of gain, and little gain at that. For those who
make great gains but from wrong sources, and not the right gains,
e.g. despots when they sack cities and spoil temples, we do not call
mean but rather wicked, impious, and unjust. But the gamester and
the footpad (and the highwayman) belong to the class of the mean,
since they have a sordid love of gain. For it is for gain that both
of them ply their craft and endure the disgrace of it, and the one
faces the greatest dangers for the sake of the booty, while the other
makes gain from his friends, to whom he ought to be giving. Both,
then, since they are willing to make gain from wrong sources, are
sordid lovers of gain; therefore all such forms of taking are mean.

And it is natural that meanness is described as the contrary of liberality;
for not only is it a greater evil than prodigality, but men err more
often in this direction than in the way of prodigality as we have
described it. 

So much, then, for liberality and the opposed vices. 

2 

It would seem proper to discuss magnificence next. For this also seems
to be a virtue concerned with wealth; but it does not like liberality
extend to all the actions that are concerned with wealth, but only
to those that involve expenditure; and in these it surpasses liberality
in scale. For, as the name itself suggests, it is a fitting expenditure
involving largeness of scale. But the scale is relative; for the expense
of equipping a trireme is not the same as that of heading a sacred
embassy. It is what is fitting, then, in relation to the agent, and
to the circumstances and the object. The man who in small or middling
things spends according to the merits of the case is not called magnificent
(e.g. the man who can say 'many a gift I gave the wanderer'), but
only the man who does so in great things. For the magnificent man
is liberal, but the liberal man is not necessarily magnificent. The
deficiency of this state of character is called niggardliness, the
excess vulgarity, lack of taste, and the like, which do not go to
excess in the amount spent on right objects, but by showy expenditure
in the wrong circumstances and the wrong manner; we shall speak of
these vices later. 

The magnificent man is like an artist; for he can see what is fitting
and spend large sums tastefully. For, as we said at the begining,
a state of character is determined by its activities and by its objects.
Now the expenses of the magnificent man are large and fitting. Such,
therefore, are also his results; for thus there will be a great expenditure
and one that is fitting to its result. Therefore the result should
be worthy of the expense, and the expense should be worthy of the
result, or should even exceed it. And the magnificent man will spend
such sums for honour's sake; for this is common to the virtues. And
further he will do so gladly and lavishly; for nice calculation is
a niggardly thing. And he will consider how the result can be made
most beautiful and most becoming rather than for how much it can be
produced and how it can be produced most cheaply. It is necessary,
then, that the magnificent man be also liberal. For the liberal man
also will spend what he ought and as he ought; and it is in these
matters that the greatness implied in the name of the magnificent
man-his bigness, as it were-is manifested, since liberality is concerned
with these matters; and at an equal expense he will produce a more
magnificent work of art. For a possession and a work of art have not
the same excellence. The most valuable possession is that which is
worth most, e.g. gold, but the most valuable work of art is that which
is great and beautiful (for the contemplation of such a work inspires
admiration, and so does magnificence); and a work has an excellence-viz.
magnificence-which involves magnitude. Magnificence is an attribute
of expenditures of the kind which we call honourable, e.g. those connected
with the gods-votive offerings, buildings, and sacrifices-and similarly
with any form of religious worship, and all those that are proper
objects of public-spirited ambition, as when people think they ought
to equip a chorus or a trireme, or entertain the city, in a brilliant
way. But in all cases, as has been said, we have regard to the agent
as well and ask who he is and what means he has; for the expenditure
should be worthy of his means, and suit not only the result but also
the producer. Hence a poor man cannot be magnificent, since he has
not the means with which to spend large sums fittingly; and he who
tries is a fool, since he spends beyond what can be expected of him
and what is proper, but it is right expenditure that is virtuous.
But great expenditure is becoming to those who have suitable means
to start with, acquired by their own efforts or from ancestors or
connexions, and to people of high birth or reputation, and so on;
for all these things bring with them greatness and prestige. Primarily,
then, the magnificent man is of this sort, and magnificence is shown
in expenditures of this sort, as has been said; for these are the
greatest and most honourable. Of private occasions of expenditure
the most suitable are those that take place once for all, e.g. a wedding
or anything of the kind, or anything that interests the whole city
or the people of position in it, and also the receiving of foreign
guests and the sending of them on their way, and gifts and counter-gifts;
for the magnificent man spends not on himself but on public objects,
and gifts bear some resemblance to votive offerings. A magnificent
man will also furnish his house suitably to his wealth (for even a
house is a sort of public ornament), and will spend by preference
on those works that are lasting (for these are the most beautiful),
and on every class of things he will spend what is becoming; for the
same things are not suitable for gods and for men, nor in a temple
and in a tomb. And since each expenditure may be great of its kind,
and what is most magnificent absolutely is great expenditure on a
great object, but what is magnificent here is what is great in these
circumstances, and greatness in the work differs from greatness in
the expense (for the most beautiful ball or bottle is magnificent
as a gift to a child, but the price of it is small and mean),-therefore
it is characteristic of the magnificent man, whatever kind of result
he is producing, to produce it magnificently (for such a result is
not easily surpassed) and to make it worthy of the expenditure.

Such, then, is the magnificent man; the man who goes to excess and
is vulgar exceeds, as has been said, by spending beyond what is right.
For on small objects of expenditure he spends much and displays a
tasteless showiness; e.g. he gives a club dinner on the scale of a
wedding banquet, and when he provides the chorus for a comedy he brings
them on to the stage in purple, as they do at Megara. And all such
things he will do not for honour's sake but to show off his wealth,
and because he thinks he is admired for these things, and where he
ought to spend much he spends little and where little, much. The niggardly
man on the other hand will fall short in everything, and after spending
the greatest sums will spoil the beauty of the result for a trifle,
and whatever he is doing he will hesitate and consider how he may
spend least, and lament even that, and think he is doing everything
on a bigger scale than he ought. 

These states of character, then, are vices; yet they do not bring
disgrace because they are neither harmful to one's neighbour nor very
unseemly. 

3 

Pride seems even from its name to be concerned with great things;
what sort of great things, is the first question we must try to answer.
It makes no difference whether we consider the state of character
or the man characterized by it. Now the man is thought to be proud
who thinks himself worthy of great things, being worthy of them; for
he who does so beyond his deserts is a fool, but no virtuous man is
foolish or silly. The proud man, then, is the man we have described.
For he who is worthy of little and thinks himself worthy of little
is temperate, but not proud; for pride implies greatness, as beauty
implies a goodsized body, and little people may be neat and well-proportioned
but cannot be beautiful. On the other hand, he who thinks himself
worthy of great things, being unworthy of them, is vain; though not
every one who thinks himself worthy of more than he really is worthy
of in vain. The man who thinks himself worthy of worthy of less than
he is really worthy of is unduly humble, whether his deserts be great
or moderate, or his deserts be small but his claims yet smaller. And
the man whose deserts are great would seem most unduly humble; for
what would he have done if they had been less? The proud man, then,
is an extreme in respect of the greatness of his claims, but a mean
in respect of the rightness of them; for he claims what is accordance
with his merits, while the others go to excess or fall short.

If, then, he deserves and claims great things, and above all the great
things, he will be concerned with one thing in particular. Desert
is relative to external goods; and the greatest of these, we should
say, is that which we render to the gods, and which people of position
most aim at, and which is the prize appointed for the noblest deeds;
and this is honour; that is surely the greatest of external goods.
Honours and dishonours, therefore, are the objects with respect to
which the proud man is as he should be. And even apart from argument
it is with honour that proud men appear to be concerned; for it is
honour that they chiefly claim, but in accordance with their deserts.
The unduly humble man falls short both in comparison with his own
merits and in comparison with the proud man's claims. The vain man
goes to excess in comparison with his own merits, but does not exceed
the proud man's claims. 

Now the proud man, since he deserves most, must be good in the highest
degree; for the better man always deserves more, and the best man
most. Therefore the truly proud man must be good. And greatness in
every virtue would seem to be characteristic of a proud man. And it
would be most unbecoming for a proud man to fly from danger, swinging
his arms by his sides, or to wrong another; for to what end should
he do disgraceful acts, he to whom nothing is great? If we consider
him point by point we shall see the utter absurdity of a proud man
who is not good. Nor, again, would he be worthy of honour if he were
bad; for honour is the prize of virtue, and it is to the good that
it is rendered. Pride, then, seems to be a sort of crown of the virtues;
for it makes them greater, and it is not found without them. Therefore
it is hard to be truly proud; for it is impossible without nobility
and goodness of character. It is chiefly with honours and dishonours,
then, that the proud man is concerned; and at honours that are great
and conferred by good men he will be moderately Pleased, thinking
that he is coming by his own or even less than his own; for there
can be no honour that is worthy of perfect virtue, yet he will at
any rate accept it since they have nothing greater to bestow on him;
but honour from casual people and on trifling grounds he will utterly
despise, since it is not this that he deserves, and dishonour too,
since in his case it cannot be just. In the first place, then, as
has been said, the proud man is concerned with honours; yet he will
also bear himself with moderation towards wealth and power and all
good or evil fortune, whatever may befall him, and will be neither
over-joyed by good fortune nor over-pained by evil. For not even towards
honour does he bear himself as if it were a very great thing. Power
and wealth are desirable for the sake of honour (at least those who
have them wish to get honour by means of them); and for him to whom
even honour is a little thing the others must be so too. Hence proud
men are thought to be disdainful. 

The goods of fortune also are thought to contribute towards pride.
For men who are well-born are thought worthy of honour, and so are
those who enjoy power or wealth; for they are in a superior position,
and everything that has a superiority in something good is held in
greater honour. Hence even such things make men prouder; for they
are honoured by some for having them; but in truth the good man alone
is to be honoured; he, however, who has both advantages is thought
the more worthy of honour. But those who without virtue have such
goods are neither justified in making great claims nor entitled to
the name of 'proud'; for these things imply perfect virtue. Disdainful
and insolent, however, even those who have such goods become. For
without virtue it is not easy to bear gracefully the goods of fortune;
and, being unable to bear them, and thinking themselves superior to
others, they despise others and themselves do what they please. They
imitate the proud man without being like him, and this they do where
they can; so they do not act virtuously, but they do despise others.
For the proud man despises justly (since he thinks truly), but the
many do so at random. 

He does not run into trifling dangers, nor is he fond of danger, because
he honours few things; but he will face great dangers, and when he
is in danger he is unsparing of his life, knowing that there are conditions
on which life is not worth having. And he is the sort of man to confer
benefits, but he is ashamed of receiving them; for the one is the
mark of a superior, the other of an inferior. And he is apt to confer
greater benefits in return; for thus the original benefactor besides
being paid will incur a debt to him, and will be the gainer by the
transaction. They seem also to remember any service they have done,
but not those they have received (for he who receives a service is
inferior to him who has done it, but the proud man wishes to be superior),
and to hear of the former with pleasure, of the latter with displeasure;
this, it seems, is why Thetis did not mention to Zeus the services
she had done him, and why the Spartans did not recount their services
to the Athenians, but those they had received. It is a mark of the
proud man also to ask for nothing or scarcely anything, but to give
help readily, and to be dignified towards people who enjoy high position
and good fortune, but unassuming towards those of the middle class;
for it is a difficult and lofty thing to be superior to the former,
but easy to be so to the latter, and a lofty bearing over the former
is no mark of ill-breeding, but among humble people it is as vulgar
as a display of strength against the weak. Again, it is characteristic
of the proud man not to aim at the things commonly held in honour,
or the things in which others excel; to be sluggish and to hold back
except where great honour or a great work is at stake, and to be a
man of few deeds, but of great and notable ones. He must also be open
in his hate and in his love (for to conceal one's feelings, i.e. to
care less for truth than for what people will think, is a coward's
part), and must speak and act openly; for he is free of speech because
he is contemptuous, and he is given to telling the truth, except when
he speaks in irony to the vulgar. He must be unable to make his life
revolve round another, unless it be a friend; for this is slavish,
and for this reason all flatterers are servile and people lacking
in self-respect are flatterers. Nor is he given to admiration; for
nothing to him is great. Nor is he mindful of wrongs; for it is not
the part of a proud man to have a long memory, especially for wrongs,
but rather to overlook them. Nor is he a gossip; for he will speak
neither about himself nor about another, since he cares not to be
praised nor for others to be blamed; nor again is he given to praise;
and for the same reason he is not an evil-speaker, even about his
enemies, except from haughtiness. With regard to necessary or small
matters he is least of all me given to lamentation or the asking of
favours; for it is the part of one who takes such matters seriously
to behave so with respect to them. He is one who will possess beautiful
and profitless things rather than profitable and useful ones; for
this is more proper to a character that suffices to itself.

Further, a slow step is thought proper to the proud man, a deep voice,
and a level utterance; for the man who takes few things seriously
is not likely to be hurried, nor the man who thinks nothing great
to be excited, while a shrill voice and a rapid gait are the results
of hurry and excitement. 

Such, then, is the proud man; the man who falls short of him is unduly
humble, and the man who goes beyond him is vain. Now even these are
not thought to be bad (for they are not malicious), but only mistaken.
For the unduly humble man, being worthy of good things, robs himself
of what he deserves, and to have something bad about him from the
fact that he does not think himself worthy of good things, and seems
also not to know himself; else he would have desired the things he
was worthy of, since these were good. Yet such people are not thought
to be fools, but rather unduly retiring. Such a reputation, however,
seems actually to make them worse; for each class of people aims at
what corresponds to its worth, and these people stand back even from
noble actions and undertakings, deeming themselves unworthy, and from
external goods no less. Vain people, on the other hand, are fools
and ignorant of themselves, and that manifestly; for, not being worthy
of them, they attempt honourable undertakings, and then are found
out; and tetadorn themselves with clothing and outward show and such
things, and wish their strokes of good fortune to be made public,
and speak about them as if they would be honoured for them. But undue
humility is more opposed to pride than vanity is; for it is both commoner
and worse. 

Pride, then, is concerned with honour on the grand scale, as has been
said. 

4 

There seems to be in the sphere of honour also, as was said in our
first remarks on the subject, a virtue which would appear to be related
to pride as liberality is to magnificence. For neither of these has
anything to do with the grand scale, but both dispose us as is right
with regard to middling and unimportant objects; as in getting and
giving of wealth there is a mean and an excess and defect, so too
honour may be desired more than is right, or less, or from the right
sources and in the right way. We blame both the ambitious man as am
at honour more than is right and from wrong sources, and the unambitious
man as not willing to be honoured even for noble reasons. But sometimes
we praise the ambitious man as being manly and a lover of what is
noble, and the unambitious man as being moderate and self-controlled,
as we said in our first treatment of the subject. Evidently, since
'fond of such and such an object' has more than one meaning, we do
not assign the term 'ambition' or 'love of honour' always to the same
thing, but when we praise the quality we think of the man who loves
honour more than most people, and when we blame it we think of him
who loves it more than is right. The mean being without a name, the
extremes seem to dispute for its place as though that were vacant
by default. But where there is excess and defect, there is also an
intermediate; now men desire honour both more than they should and
less; therefore it is possible also to do so as one should; at all
events this is the state of character that is praised, being an unnamed
mean in respect of honour. Relatively to ambition it seems to be unambitiousness,
and relatively to unambitiousness it seems to be ambition, while relatively
to both severally it seems in a sense to be both together. This appears
to be true of the other virtues also. But in this case the extremes
seem to be contradictories because the mean has not received a name.

5 

Good temper is a mean with respect to anger; the middle state being
unnamed, and the extremes almost without a name as well, we place
good temper in the middle position, though it inclines towards the
deficiency, which is without a name. The excess might called a sort
of 'irascibility'. For the passion is anger, while its causes are
many and diverse. 

The man who is angry at the right things and with the right people,
and, further, as he ought, when he ought, and as long as he ought,
is praised. This will be the good-tempered man, then, since good temper
is praised. For the good-tempered man tends to be unperturbed and
not to be led by passion, but to be angry in the manner, at the things,
and for the length of time, that the rule dictates; but he is thought
to err rather in the direction of deficiency; for the good-tempered
man is not revengeful, but rather tends to make allowances.

The deficiency, whether it is a sort of 'inirascibility' or whatever
it is, is blamed. For those who are not angry at the things they should
be angry at are thought to be fools, and so are those who are not
angry in the right way, at the right time, or with the right persons;
for such a man is thought not to feel things nor to be pained by them,
and, since he does not get angry, he is thought unlikely to defend
himself; and to endure being insulted and put up with insult to one's
friends is slavish. 

The excess can be manifested in all the points that have been named
(for one can be angry with the wrong persons, at the wrong things,
more than is right, too quickly, or too long); yet all are not found
in the same person. Indeed they could not; for evil destroys even
itself, and if it is complete becomes unbearable. Now hot-tempered
people get angry quickly and with the wrong persons and at the wrong
things and more than is right, but their anger ceases quickly-which
is the best point about them. This happens to them because they do
not restrain their anger but retaliate openly owing to their quickness
of temper, and then their anger ceases. By reason of excess choleric
people are quick-tempered and ready to be angry with everything and
on every occasion; whence their name. Sulky people are hard to appease,
and retain their anger long; for they repress their passion. But it
ceases when they retaliate; for revenge relieves them of their anger,
producing in them pleasure instead of pain. If this does not happen
they retain their burden; for owing to its not being obvious no one
even reasons with them, and to digest one's anger in oneself takes
time. Such people are most troublesome to themselves and to their
dearest friends. We call had-tempered those who are angry at the wrong
things, more than is right, and longer, and cannot be appeased until
they inflict vengeance or punishment. 

To good temper we oppose the excess rather than the defect; for not
only is it commoner since revenge is the more human), but bad-tempered
people are worse to live with. 

What we have said in our earlier treatment of the subject is plain
also from what we are now saying; viz. that it is not easy to define
how, with whom, at what, and how long one should be angry, and at
what point right action ceases and wrong begins. For the man who strays
a little from the path, either towards the more or towards the less,
is not blamed; since sometimes we praise those who exhibit the deficiency,
and call them good-tempered, and sometimes we call angry people manly,
as being capable of ruling. How far, therefore, and how a man must
stray before he becomes blameworthy, it is not easy to state in words;
for the decision depends on the particular facts and on perception.
But so much at least is plain, that the middle state is praiseworthy-
that in virtue of which we are angry with the right people, at the
right things, in the right way, and so on, while the excesses and
defects are blameworthy- slightly so if they are present in a low
degree, more if in a higher degree, and very much if in a high degree.
Evidently, then, we must cling to the middle state.- Enough of the
states relative to anger. 

6 

In gatherings of men, in social life and the interchange of words
and deeds, some men are thought to be obsequious, viz. those who to
give pleasure praise everything and never oppose, but think it their
duty 'to give no pain to the people they meet'; while those who, on
the contrary, oppose everything and care not a whit about giving pain
are called churlish and contentious. That the states we have named
are culpable is plain enough, and that the middle state is laudable-
that in virtue of which a man will put up with, and will resent, the
right things and in the right way; but no name has been assigned to
it, though it most resembles friendship. For the man who corresponds
to this middle state is very much what, with affection added, we call
a good friend. But the state in question differs from friendship in
that it implies no passion or affection for one's associates; since
it is not by reason of loving or hating that such a man takes everything
in the right way, but by being a man of a certain kind. For he will
behave so alike towards those he knows and those he does not know,
towards intimates and those who are not so, except that in each of
these cases he will behave as is befitting; for it is not proper to
have the same care for intimates and for strangers, nor again is it
the same conditions that make it right to give pain to them. Now we
have said generally that he will associate with people in the right
way; but it is by reference to what is honourable and expedient that
he will aim at not giving pain or at contributing pleasure. For he
seems to be concerned with the pleasures and pains of social life;
and wherever it is not honourable, or is harmful, for him to contribute
pleasure, he will refuse, and will choose rather to give pain; also
if his acquiescence in another's action would bring disgrace, and
that in a high degree, or injury, on that other, while his opposition
brings a little pain, he will not acquiesce but will decline. He will
associate differently with people in high station and with ordinary
people, with closer and more distant acquaintances, and so too with
regard to all other differences, rendering to each class what is befitting,
and while for its own sake he chooses to contribute pleasure, and
avoids the giving of pain, he will be guided by the consequences,
if these are greater, i.e. honour and expediency. For the sake of
a great future pleasure, too, he will inflict small pains.

The man who attains the mean, then, is such as we have described,
but has not received a name; of those who contribute pleasure, the
man who aims at being pleasant with no ulterior object is obsequious,
but the man who does so in order that he may get some advantage in
the direction of money or the things that money buys is a flatterer;
while the man who quarrels with everything is, as has been said, churlish
and contentious. And the extremes seem to be contradictory to each
other because the mean is without a name. 

7 

The mean opposed to boastfulness is found in almost the same sphere;
and this also is without a name. It will be no bad plan to describe
these states as well; for we shall both know the facts about character
better if we go through them in detail, and we shall be convinced
that the virtues are means if we see this to be so in all cases. In
the field of social life those who make the giving of pleasure or
pain their object in associating with others have been described;
let us now describe those who pursue truth or falsehood alike in words
and deeds and in the claims they put forward. The boastful man, then,
is thought to be apt to claim the things that bring glory, when he
has not got them, or to claim more of them than he has, and the mock-modest
man on the other hand to disclaim what he has or belittle it, while
the man who observes the mean is one who calls a thing by its own
name, being truthful both in life and in word, owning to what he has,
and neither more nor less. Now each of these courses may be adopted
either with or without an object. But each man speaks and acts and
lives in accordance with his character, if he is not acting for some
ulterior object. And falsehood is in itself mean and culpable, and
truth noble and worthy of praise. Thus the truthful man is another
case of a man who, being in the mean, is worthy of praise, and both
forms of untruthful man are culpable, and particularly the boastful
man. 

Let us discuss them both, but first of all the truthful man. We are
not speaking of the man who keeps faith in his agreements, i.e. in
the things that pertain to justice or injustice (for this would belong
to another virtue), but the man who in the matters in which nothing
of this sort is at stake is true both in word and in life because
his character is such. But such a man would seem to be as a matter
of fact equitable. For the man who loves truth, and is truthful where
nothing is at stake, will still more be truthful where something is
at stake; he will avoid falsehood as something base, seeing that he
avoided it even for its own sake; and such a man is worthy of praise.
He inclines rather to understate the truth; for this seems in better
taste because exaggerations are wearisome. 

He who claims more than he has with no ulterior object is a contemptible
sort of fellow (otherwise he would not have delighted in falsehood),
but seems futile rather than bad; but if he does it for an object,
he who does it for the sake of reputation or honour is (for a boaster)
not very much to be blamed, but he who does it for money, or the things
that lead to money, is an uglier character (it is not the capacity
that makes the boaster, but the purpose; for it is in virtue of his
state of character and by being a man of a certain kind that he is
boaster); as one man is a liar because he enjoys the lie itself, and
another because he desires reputation or gain. Now those who boast
for the sake of reputation claim such qualities as will praise or
congratulation, but those whose object is gain claim qualities which
are of value to one's neighbours and one's lack of which is not easily
detected, e.g. the powers of a seer, a sage, or a physician. For this
reason it is such things as these that most people claim and boast
about; for in them the above-mentioned qualities are found.

Mock-modest people, who understate things, seem more attractive in
character; for they are thought to speak not for gain but to avoid
parade; and here too it is qualities which bring reputation that they
disclaim, as Socrates used to do. Those who disclaim trifling and
obvious qualities are called humbugs and are more contemptible; and
sometimes this seems to be boastfulness, like the Spartan dress; for
both excess and great deficiency are boastful. But those who use understatement
with moderation and understate about matters that do not very much
force themselves on our notice seem attractive. And it is the boaster
that seems to be opposed to the truthful man; for he is the worse
character. 

8 

Since life includes rest as well as activity, and in this is included
leisure and amusement, there seems here also to be a kind of intercourse
which is tasteful; there is such a thing as saying- and again listening
to- what one should and as one should. The kind of people one is speaking
or listening to will also make a difference. Evidently here also there
is both an excess and a deficiency as compared with the mean. Those
who carry humour to excess are thought to be vulgar buffoons, striving
after humour at all costs, and aiming rather at raising a laugh than
at saying what is becoming and at avoiding pain to the object of their
fun; while those who can neither make a joke themselves nor put up
with those who do are thought to be boorish and unpolished. But those
who joke in a tasteful way are called ready-witted, which implies
a sort of readiness to turn this way and that; for such sallies are
thought to be movements of the character, and as bodies are discriminated
by their movements, so too are characters. The ridiculous side of
things is not far to seek, however, and most people delight more than
they should in amusement and in jestinly. and so even buffoons are
called ready-witted because they are found attractive; but that they
differ from the ready-witted man, and to no small extent, is clear
from what has been said. 

To the middle state belongs also tact; it is the mark of a tactful
man to say and listen to such things as befit a good and well-bred
man; for there are some things that it befits such a man to say and
to hear by way of jest, and the well-bred man's jesting differs from
that of a vulgar man, and the joking of an educated man from that
of an uneducated. One may see this even from the old and the new comedies;
to the authors of the former indecency of language was amusing, to
those of the latter innuendo is more so; and these differ in no small
degree in respect of propriety. Now should we define the man who jokes
well by his saying what is not unbecoming to a well-bred man, or by
his not giving pain, or even giving delight, to the hearer? Or is
the latter definition, at any rate, itself indefinite, since different
things are hateful or pleasant to different people? The kind of jokes
he will listen to will be the same; for the kind he can put up with
are also the kind he seems to make. There are, then, jokes he will
not make; for the jest is a sort of abuse, and there are things that
lawgivers forbid us to abuse; and they should, perhaps, have forbidden
us even to make a jest of such. The refined and well-bred man, therefore,
will be as we have described, being as it were a law to himself.

Such, then, is the man who observes the mean, whether he be called
tactful or ready-witted. The buffoon, on the other hand, is the slave
of his sense of humour, and spares neither himself nor others if he
can raise a laugh, and says things none of which a man of refinement
would say, and to some of which he would not even listen. The boor,
again, is useless for such social intercourse; for he contributes
nothing and finds fault with everything. But relaxation and amusement
are thought to be a necessary element in life. 

The means in life that have been described, then, are three in number,
and are all concerned with an interchange of words and deeds of some
kind. They differ, however, in that one is concerned with truth; and
the other two with pleasantness. Of those concerned with pleasure,
one is displayed in jests, the other in the general social intercourse
of life. 

9 

Shame should not be described as a virtue; for it is more like a feeling
than a state of character. It is defined, at any rate, as a kind of
fear of dishonour, and produces an effect similar to that produced
by fear of danger; for people who feel disgraced blush, and those
who fear death turn pale. Both, therefore, seem to be in a sense bodily
conditions, which is thought to be characteristic of feeling rather
than of a state of character. 

The feeling is not becoming to every age, but only to youth. For we
think young people should be prone to the feeling of shame because
they live by feeling and therefore commit many errors, but are restrained
by shame; and we praise young people who are prone to this feeling,
but an older person no one would praise for being prone to the sense
of disgrace, since we think he should not do anything that need cause
this sense. For the sense of disgrace is not even characteristic of
a good man, since it is consequent on bad actions (for such actions
should not be done; and if some actions are disgraceful in very truth
and others only according to common opinion, this makes no difference;
for neither class of actions should be done, so that no disgrace should
be felt); and it is a mark of a bad man even to be such as to do any
disgraceful action. To be so constituted as to feel disgraced if one
does such an action, and for this reason to think oneself good, is
absurd; for it is for voluntary actions that shame is felt, and the
good man will never voluntarily do bad actions. But shame may be said
to be conditionally a good thing; if a good man does such actions,
he will feel disgraced; but the virtues are not subject to such a
qualification. And if shamelessness-not to be ashamed of doing base
actions-is bad, that does not make it good to be ashamed of doing
such actions. Continence too is not virtue, but a mixed sort of state;
this will be shown later. Now, however, let us discuss justice.



BOOK V

1 

With regards to justice and injustice we must (1) consider what kind
of actions they are concerned with, (2) what sort of mean justice
is, and (3) between what extremes the just act is intermediate. Our
investigation shall follow the same course as the preceding discussions.

We see that all men mean by justice that kind of state of character
which makes people disposed to do what is just and makes them act
justly and wish for what is just; and similarly by injustice that
state which makes them act unjustly and wish for what is unjust. Let
us too, then, lay this down as a general basis. For the same is not
true of the sciences and the faculties as of states of character.
A faculty or a science which is one and the same is held to relate
to contrary objects, but a state of character which is one of two
contraries does not produce the contrary results; e.g. as a result
of health we do not do what is the opposite of healthy, but only what
is healthy; for we say a man walks healthily, when he walks as a healthy
man would. 

Now often one contrary state is recognized from its contrary, and
often states are recognized from the subjects that exhibit them; for
(A) if good condition is known, bad condition also becomes known,
and (B) good condition is known from the things that are in good condition,
and they from it. If good condition is firmness of flesh, it is necessary
both that bad condition should be flabbiness of flesh and that the
wholesome should be that which causes firmness in flesh. And it follows
for the most part that if one contrary is ambiguous the other also
will be ambiguous; e.g. if 'just' is so, that 'unjust' will be so
too. 

Now 'justice' and 'injustice' seem to be ambiguous, but because their
different meanings approach near to one another the ambiguity escapes
notice and is not obvious as it is, comparatively, when the meanings
are far apart, e.g. (for here the difference in outward form is great)
as the ambiguity in the use of kleis for the collar-bone of an animal
and for that with which we lock a door. Let us take as a starting-point,
then, the various meanings of 'an unjust man'. Both the lawless man
and the grasping and unfair man are thought to be unjust, so that
evidently both the law-abiding and the fair man will be just. The
just, then, is the lawful and the fair, the unjust the unlawful and
the unfair. 

Since the unjust man is grasping, he must be concerned with goods-not
all goods, but those with which prosperity and adversity have to do,
which taken absolutely are always good, but for a particular person
are not always good. Now men pray for and pursue these things; but
they should not, but should pray that the things that are good absolutely
may also be good for them, and should choose the things that are good
for them. The unjust man does not always choose the greater, but also
the less-in the case of things bad absolutely; but because the lesser
evil is itself thought to be in a sense good, and graspingness is
directed at the good, therefore he is thought to be grasping. And
he is unfair; for this contains and is common to both. 

Since the lawless man was seen to be unjust and the law-abiding man
just, evidently all lawful acts are in a sense just acts; for the
acts laid down by the legislative art are lawful, and each of these,
we say, is just. Now the laws in their enactments on all subjects
aim at the common advantage either of all or of the best or of those
who hold power, or something of the sort; so that in one sense we
call those acts just that tend to produce and preserve happiness and
its components for the political society. And the law bids us do both
the acts of a brave man (e.g. not to desert our post nor take to flight
nor throw away our arms), and those of a temperate man (e.g. not to
commit adultery nor to gratify one's lust), and those of a good-tempered
man (e.g. not to strike another nor to speak evil), and similarly
with regard to the other virtues and forms of wickedness, commanding
some acts and forbidding others; and the rightly-framed law does this
rightly, and the hastily conceived one less well. This form of justice,
then, is complete virtue, but not absolutely, but in relation to our
neighbour. And therefore justice is often thought to be the greatest
of virtues, and 'neither evening nor morning star' is so wonderful;
and proverbially 'in justice is every virtue comprehended'. And it
is complete virtue in its fullest sense, because it is the actual
exercise of complete virtue. It is complete because he who possesses
it can exercise his virtue not only in himself but towards his neighbour
also; for many men can exercise virtue in their own affairs, but not
in their relations to their neighbour. This is why the saying of Bias
is thought to be true, that 'rule will show the man'; for a ruler
is necessarily in relation to other men and a member of a society.
For this same reason justice, alone of the virtues, is thought to
be 'another's good', because it is related to our neighbour; for it
does what is advantageous to another, either a ruler or a copartner.
Now the worst man is he who exercises his wickedness both towards
himself and towards his friends, and the best man is not he who exercises
his virtue towards himself but he who exercises it towards another;
for this is a difficult task. Justice in this sense, then, is not
part of virtue but virtue entire, nor is the contrary injustice a
part of vice but vice entire. What the difference is between virtue
and justice in this sense is plain from what we have said; they are
the same but their essence is not the same; what, as a relation to
one's neighbour, is justice is, as a certain kind of state without
qualification, virtue. 

2 

But at all events what we are investigating is the justice which is
a part of virtue; for there is a justice of this kind, as we maintain.
Similarly it is with injustice in the particular sense that we are
concerned. 

That there is such a thing is indicated by the fact that while the
man who exhibits in action the other forms of wickedness acts wrongly
indeed, but not graspingly (e.g. the man who throws away his shield
through cowardice or speaks harshly through bad temper or fails to
help a friend with money through meanness), when a man acts graspingly
he often exhibits none of these vices,-no, nor all together, but certainly
wickedness of some kind (for we blame him) and injustice. There is,
then, another kind of injustice which is a part of injustice in the
wide sense, and a use of the word 'unjust' which answers to a part
of what is unjust in the wide sense of 'contrary to the law'. Again
if one man commits adultery for the sake of gain and makes money by
it, while another does so at the bidding of appetite though he loses
money and is penalized for it, the latter would be held to be self-indulgent
rather than grasping, but the former is unjust, but not self-indulgent;
evidently, therefore, he is unjust by reason of his making gain by
his act. Again, all other unjust acts are ascribed invariably to some
particular kind of wickedness, e.g. adultery to self-indulgence, the
desertion of a comrade in battle to cowardice, physical violence to
anger; but if a man makes gain, his action is ascribed to no form
of wickedness but injustice. Evidently, therefore, there is apart
from injustice in the wide sense another, 'particular', injustice
which shares the name and nature of the first, because its definition
falls within the same genus; for the significance of both consists
in a relation to one's neighbour, but the one is concerned with honour
or money or safety-or that which includes all these, if we had a single
name for it-and its motive is the pleasure that arises from gain;
while the other is concerned with all the objects with which the good
man is concerned. 

It is clear, then, that there is more than one kind of justice, and
that there is one which is distinct from virtue entire; we must try
to grasp its genus and differentia. 

The unjust has been divided into the unlawful and the unfair, and
the just into the lawful and the fair. To the unlawful answers the
afore-mentioned sense of injustice. But since unfair and the unlawful
are not the same, but are different as a part is from its whole (for
all that is unfair is unlawful, but not all that is unlawful is unfair),
the unjust and injustice in the sense of the unfair are not the same
as but different from the former kind, as part from whole; for injustice
in this sense is a part of injustice in the wide sense, and similarly
justice in the one sense of justice in the other. Therefore we must
speak also about particular justice and particular and similarly about
the just and the unjust. The justice, then, which answers to the whole
of virtue, and the corresponding injustice, one being the exercise
of virtue as a whole, and the other that of vice as a whole, towards
one's neighbour, we may leave on one side. And how the meanings of
'just' and 'unjust' which answer to these are to be distinguished
is evident; for practically the majority of the acts commanded by
the law are those which are prescribed from the point of view of virtue
taken as a whole; for the law bids us practise every virtue and forbids
us to practise any vice. And the things that tend to produce virtue
taken as a whole are those of the acts prescribed by the law which
have been prescribed with a view to education for the common good.
But with regard to the education of the individual as such, which
makes him without qualification a good man, we must determine later
whether this is the function of the political art or of another; for
perhaps it is not the same to be a good man and a good citizen of
any state taken at random. 

Of particular justice and that which is just in the corresponding
sense, (A) one kind is that which is manifested in distributions of
honour or money or the other things that fall to be divided among
those who have a share in the constitution (for in these it is possible
for one man to have a share either unequal or equal to that of another),
and (B) one is that which plays a rectifying part in transactions
between man and man. Of this there are two divisions; of transactions
(1) some are voluntary and (2) others involuntary- voluntary such
transactions as sale, purchase, loan for consumption, pledging, loan
for use, depositing, letting (they are called voluntary because the
origin of these transactions is voluntary), while of the involuntary
(a) some are clandestine, such as theft, adultery, poisoning, procuring,
enticement of slaves, assassination, false witness, and (b) others
are violent, such as assault, imprisonment, murder, robbery with violence,
mutilation, abuse, insult. 

3 

(A) We have shown that both the unjust man and the unjust act are
unfair or unequal; now it is clear that there is also an intermediate
between the two unequals involved in either case. And this is the
equal; for in any kind of action in which there's a more and a less
there is also what is equal. If, then, the unjust is unequal, just
is equal, as all men suppose it to be, even apart from argument. And
since the equal is intermediate, the just will be an intermediate.
Now equality implies at least two things. The just, then, must be
both intermediate and equal and relative (i.e. for certain persons).
And since the equall intermediate it must be between certain things
(which are respectively greater and less); equal, it involves two
things; qua just, it is for certain people. The just, therefore, involves
at least four terms; for the persons for whom it is in fact just are
two, and the things in which it is manifested, the objects distributed,
are two. And the same equality will exist between the persons and
between the things concerned; for as the latter the things concerned-are
related, so are the former; if they are not equal, they will not have
what is equal, but this is the origin of quarrels and complaints-when
either equals have and are awarded unequal shares, or unequals equal
shares. Further, this is plain from the fact that awards should be
'according to merit'; for all men agree that what is just in distribution
must be according to merit in some sense, though they do not all specify
the same sort of merit, but democrats identify it with the status
of freeman, supporters of oligarchy with wealth (or with noble birth),
and supporters of aristocracy with excellence. 

The just, then, is a species of the proportionate (proportion being
not a property only of the kind of number which consists of abstract
units, but of number in general). For proportion is equality of ratios,
and involves four terms at least (that discrete proportion involves
four terms is plain, but so does continuous proportion, for it uses
one term as two and mentions it twice; e.g. 'as the line A is to the
line B, so is the line B to the line C'; the line B, then, has been
mentioned twice, so that if the line B be assumed twice, the proportional
terms will be four); and the just, too, involves at least four terms,
and the ratio between one pair is the same as that between the other
pair; for there is a similar distinction between the persons and between
the things. As the term A, then, is to B, so will C be to D, and therefore,
alternando, as A is to C, B will be to D. Therefore also the whole
is in the same ratio to the whole; and this coupling the distribution
effects, and, if the terms are so combined, effects justly. The conjunction,
then, of the term A with C and of B with D is what is just in distribution,
and this species of the just is intermediate, and the unjust is what
violates the proportion; for the proportional is intermediate, and
the just is proportional. (Mathematicians call this kind of proportion
geometrical; for it is in geometrical proportion that it follows that
the whole is to the whole as either part is to the corresponding part.)
This proportion is not continuous; for we cannot get a single term
standing for a person and a thing. 

This, then, is what the just is-the proportional; the unjust is what
violates the proportion. Hence one term becomes too great, the other
too small, as indeed happens in practice; for the man who acts unjustly
has too much, and the man who is unjustly treated too little, of what
is good. In the case of evil the reverse is true; for the lesser evil
is reckoned a good in comparison with the greater evil, since the
lesser evil is rather to be chosen than the greater, and what is worthy
of choice is good, and what is worthier of choice a greater good.

This, then, is one species of the just. 
4 

(B) The remaining one is the rectificatory, which arises in connexion
with transactions both voluntary and involuntary. This form of the
just has a different specific character from the former. For the justice
which distributes common possessions is always in accordance with
the kind of proportion mentioned above (for in the case also in which
the distribution is made from the common funds of a partnership it
will be according to the same ratio which the funds put into the business
by the partners bear to one another); and the injustice opposed to
this kind of justice is that which violates the proportion. But the
justice in transactions between man and man is a sort of equality
indeed, and the injustice a sort of inequality; not according to that
kind of proportion, however, but according to arithmetical proportion.
For it makes no difference whether a good man has defrauded a bad
man or a bad man a good one, nor whether it is a good or a bad man
that has committed adultery; the law looks only to the distinctive
character of the injury, and treats the parties as equal, if one is
in the wrong and the other is being wronged, and if one inflicted
injury and the other has received it. Therefore, this kind of injustice
being an inequality, the judge tries to equalize it; for in the case
also in which one has received and the other has inflicted a wound,
or one has slain and the other been slain, the suffering and the action
have been unequally distributed; but the judge tries to equalize by
means of the penalty, taking away from the gain of the assailant.
For the term 'gain' is applied generally to such cases, even if it
be not a term appropriate to certain cases, e.g. to the person who
inflicts a woundand 'loss' to the sufferer; at all events when the
suffering has been estimated, the one is called loss and the other
gain. Therefore the equal is intermediate between the greater and
the less, but the gain and the loss are respectively greater and less
in contrary ways; more of the good and less of the evil are gain,
and the contrary is loss; intermediate between them is, as we saw,
equal, which we say is just; therefore corrective justice will be
the intermediate between loss and gain. This is why, when people dispute,
they take refuge in the judge; and to go to the judge is to go to
justice; for the nature of the judge is to be a sort of animate justice;
and they seek the judge as an intermediate, and in some states they
call judges mediators, on the assumption that if they get what is
intermediate they will get what is just. The just, then, is an intermediate,
since the judge is so. Now the judge restores equality; it is as though
there were a line divided into unequal parts, and he took away that
by which the greater segment exceeds the half, and added it to the
smaller segment. And when the whole has been equally divided, then
they say they have 'their own'-i.e. when they have got what is equal.
The equal is intermediate between the greater and the lesser line
according to arithmetical proportion. It is for this reason also that
it is called just (sikaion), because it is a division into two equal
parts (sicha), just as if one were to call it sichaion; and the judge
(sikastes) is one who bisects (sichastes). For when something is subtracted
from one of two equals and added to the other, the other is in excess
by these two; since if what was taken from the one had not been added
to the other, the latter would have been in excess by one only. It
therefore exceeds the intermediate by one, and the intermediate exceeds
by one that from which something was taken. By this, then, we shall
recognize both what we must subtract from that which has more, and
what we must add to that which has less; we must add to the latter
that by which the intermediate exceeds it, and subtract from the greatest
that by which it exceeds the intermediate. Let the lines AA', BB',
CC' be equal to one another; from the line AA' let the segment AE
have been subtracted, and to the line CC' let the segment Cd have
been added, so that the whole line DCC' exceeds the line EA' by the
segment CD and the segment CF; therefore it exceeds the line Bb' by
the segment CD. (See diagram.) 

These names, both loss and gain, have come from voluntary exchange;
for to have more than one's own is called gaining, and to have less
than one's original share is called losing, e.g. in buying and selling
and in all other matters in which the law has left people free to
make their own terms; but when they get neither more nor less but
just what belongs to themselves, they say that they have their own
and that they neither lose nor gain. 

Therefore the just is intermediate between a sort of gain and a sort
of loss, viz. those which are involuntary; it consists in having an
equal amount before and after the transaction. 

5 

Some think that reciprocity is without qualification just, as the
Pythagoreans said; for they defined justice without qualification
as reciprocity. Now 'reciprocity' fits neither distributive nor rectificatory
justice-yet people want even the justice of Rhadamanthus to mean this:

Should a man suffer what he did, right justice would be done -for
in many cases reciprocity and rectificatory justice are not in accord;
e.g. (1) if an official has inflicted a wound, he should not be wounded
in return, and if some one has wounded an official, he ought not to
be wounded only but punished in addition. Further (2) there is a great
difference between a voluntary and an involuntary act. But in associations
for exchange this sort of justice does hold men together-reciprocity
in accordance with a proportion and not on the basis of precisely
equal return. For it is by proportionate requital that the city holds
together. Men seek to return either evil for evil-and if they cana
not do so, think their position mere slavery-or good for good-and
if they cannot do so there is no exchange, but it is by exchange that
they hold together. This is why they give a prominent place to the
temple of the Graces-to promote the requital of services; for this
is characteristic of grace-we should serve in return one who has shown
grace to us, and should another time take the initiative in showing
it. 

Now proportionate return is secured by cross-conjunction. Let A be
a builder, B a shoemaker, C a house, D a shoe. The builder, then,
must get from the shoemaker the latter's work, and must himself give
him in return his own. If, then, first there is proportionate equality
of goods, and then reciprocal action takes place, the result we mention
will be effected. If not, the bargain is not equal, and does not hold;
for there is nothing to prevent the work of the one being better than
that of the other; they must therefore be equated. (And this is true
of the other arts also; for they would have been destroyed if what
the patient suffered had not been just what the agent did, and of
the same amount and kind.) For it is not two doctors that associate
for exchange, but a doctor and a farmer, or in general people who
are different and unequal; but these must be equated. This is why
all things that are exchanged must be somehow comparable. It is for
this end that money has been introduced, and it becomes in a sense
an intermediate; for it measures all things, and therefore the excess
and the defect-how many shoes are equal to a house or to a given amount
of food. The number of shoes exchanged for a house (or for a given
amount of food) must therefore correspond to the ratio of builder
to shoemaker. For if this be not so, there will be no exchange and
no intercourse. And this proportion will not be effected unless the
goods are somehow equal. All goods must therefore be measured by some
one thing, as we said before. Now this unit is in truth demand, which
holds all things together (for if men did not need one another's goods
at all, or did not need them equally, there would be either no exchange
or not the same exchange); but money has become by convention a sort
of representative of demand; and this is why it has the name 'money'
(nomisma)-because it exists not by nature but by law (nomos) and it
is in our power to change it and make it useless. There will, then,
be reciprocity when the terms have been equated so that as farmer
is to shoemaker, the amount of the shoemaker's work is to that of
the farmer's work for which it exchanges. But we must not bring them
into a figure of proportion when they have already exchanged (otherwise
one extreme will have both excesses), but when they still have their
own goods. Thus they are equals and associates just because this equality
can be effected in their case. Let A be a farmer, C food, B a shoemaker,
D his product equated to C. If it had not been possible for reciprocity
to be thus effected, there would have been no association of the parties.
That demand holds things together as a single unit is shown by the
fact that when men do not need one another, i.e. when neither needs
the other or one does not need the other, they do not exchange, as
we do when some one wants what one has oneself, e.g. when people permit
the exportation of corn in exchange for wine. This equation therefore
must be established. And for the future exchange-that if we do not
need a thing now we shall have it if ever we do need it-money is as
it were our surety; for it must be possible for us to get what we
want by bringing the money. Now the same thing happens to money itself
as to goods-it is not always worth the same; yet it tends to be steadier.
This is why all goods must have a price set on them; for then there
will always be exchange, and if so, association of man with man. Money,
then, acting as a measure, makes goods commensurate and equates them;
for neither would there have been association if there were not exchange,
nor exchange if there were not equality, nor equality if there were
not commensurability. Now in truth it is impossible that things differing
so much should become commensurate, but with reference to demand they
may become so sufficiently. There must, then, be a unit, and that
fixed by agreement (for which reason it is called money); for it is
this that makes all things commensurate, since all things are measured
by money. Let A be a house, B ten minae, C a bed. A is half of B,
if the house is worth five minae or equal to them; the bed, C, is
a tenth of B; it is plain, then, how many beds are equal to a house,
viz. five. That exchange took place thus before there was money is
plain; for it makes no difference whether it is five beds that exchange
for a house, or the money value of five beds. 

We have now defined the unjust and the just. These having been marked
off from each other, it is plain that just action is intermediate
between acting unjustly and being unjustly treated; for the one is
to have too much and the other to have too little. Justice is a kind
of mean, but not in the same way as the other virtues, but because
it relates to an intermediate amount, while injustice relates to the
extremes. And justice is that in virtue of which the just man is said
to be a doer, by choice, of that which is just, and one who will distribute
either between himself and another or between two others not so as
to give more of what is desirable to himself and less to his neighbour
(and conversely with what is harmful), but so as to give what is equal
in accordance with proportion; and similarly in distributing between
two other persons. Injustice on the other hand is similarly related
to the unjust, which is excess and defect, contrary to proportion,
of the useful or hurtful. For which reason injustice is excess and
defect, viz. because it is productive of excess and defect-in one's
own case excess of what is in its own nature useful and defect of
what is hurtful, while in the case of others it is as a whole like
what it is in one's own case, but proportion may be violated in either
direction. In the unjust act to have too little is to be unjustly
treated; to have too much is to act unjustly. 

Let this be taken as our account of the nature of justice and injustice,
and similarly of the just and the unjust in general. 

6 

Since acting unjustly does not necessarily imply being unjust, we
must ask what sort of unjust acts imply that the doer is unjust with
respect to each type of injustice, e.g. a thief, an adulterer, or
a brigand. Surely the answer does not turn on the difference between
these types. For a man might even lie with a woman knowing who she
was, but the origin of his might be not deliberate choice but passion.
He acts unjustly, then, but is not unjust; e.g. a man is not a thief,
yet he stole, nor an adulterer, yet he committed adultery; and similarly
in all other cases. 

Now we have previously stated how the reciprocal is related to the
just; but we must not forget that what we are looking for is not only
what is just without qualification but also political justice. This
is found among men who share their life with a view to selfsufficiency,
men who are free and either proportionately or arithmetically equal,
so that between those who do not fulfil this condition there is no
political justice but justice in a special sense and by analogy. For
justice exists only between men whose mutual relations are governed
by law; and law exists for men between whom there is injustice; for
legal justice is the discrimination of the just and the unjust. And
between men between whom there is injustice there is also unjust action
(though there is not injustice between all between whom there is unjust
action), and this is assigning too much to oneself of things good
in themselves and too little of things evil in themselves. This is
why we do not allow a man to rule, but rational principle, because
a man behaves thus in his own interests and becomes a tyrant. The
magistrate on the other hand is the guardian of justice, and, if of
justice, then of equality also. And since he is assumed to have no
more than his share, if he is just (for he does not assign to himself
more of what is good in itself, unless such a share is proportional
to his merits-so that it is for others that he labours, and it is
for this reason that men, as we stated previously, say that justice
is 'another's good'), therefore a reward must be given him, and this
is honour and privilege; but those for whom such things are not enough
become tyrants. 

The justice of a master and that of a father are not the same as the
justice of citizens, though they are like it; for there can be no
injustice in the unqualified sense towards thing that are one's own,
but a man's chattel, and his child until it reaches a certain age
and sets up for itself, are as it were part of himself, and no one
chooses to hurt himself (for which reason there can be no injustice
towards oneself). Therefore the justice or injustice of citizens is
not manifested in these relations; for it was as we saw according
to law, and between people naturally subject to law, and these as
we saw' are people who have an equal share in ruling and being ruled.
Hence justice can more truly be manifested towards a wife than towards
children and chattels, for the former is household justice; but even
this is different from political justice. 

7 

Of political justice part is natural, part legal, natural, that which
everywhere has the same force and does not exist by people's thinking
this or that; legal, that which is originally indifferent, but when
it has been laid down is not indifferent, e.g. that a prisoner's ransom
shall be a mina, or that a goat and not two sheep shall be sacrificed,
and again all the laws that are passed for particular cases, e.g.
that sacrifice shall be made in honour of Brasidas, and the provisions
of decrees. Now some think that all justice is of this sort, because
that which is by nature is unchangeable and has everywhere the same
force (as fire burns both here and in Persia), while they see change
in the things recognized as just. This, however, is not true in this
unqualified way, but is true in a sense; or rather, with the gods
it is perhaps not true at all, while with us there is something that
is just even by nature, yet all of it is changeable; but still some
is by nature, some not by nature. It is evident which sort of thing,
among things capable of being otherwise, is by nature, and which is
not but is legal and conventional, assuming that both are equally
changeable. And in all other things the same distinction will apply;
by nature the right hand is stronger, yet it is possible that all
men should come to be ambidextrous. The things which are just by virtue
of convention and expediency are like measures; for wine and corn
measures are not everywhere equal, but larger in wholesale and smaller
in retail markets. Similarly, the things which are just not by nature
but by human enactment are not everywhere the same, since constitutions
also are not the same, though there is but one which is everywhere
by nature the best. Of things just and lawful each is related as the
universal to its particulars; for the things that are done are many,
but of them each is one, since it is universal. 

There is a difference between the act of injustice and what is unjust,
and between the act of justice and what is just; for a thing is unjust
by nature or by enactment; and this very thing, when it has been done,
is an act of injustice, but before it is done is not yet that but
is unjust. So, too, with an act of justice (though the general term
is rather 'just action', and 'act of justice' is applied to the correction
of the act of injustice). 

Each of these must later be examined separately with regard to the
nature and number of its species and the nature of the things with
which it is concerned. 

8 

Acts just and unjust being as we have described them, a man acts unjustly
or justly whenever he does such acts voluntarily; when involuntarily,
he acts neither unjustly nor justly except in an incidental way; for
he does things which happen to be just or unjust. Whether an act is
or is not one of injustice (or of justice) is determined by its voluntariness
or involuntariness; for when it is voluntary it is blamed, and at
the same time is then an act of injustice; so that there will be things
that are unjust but not yet acts of injustice, if voluntariness be
not present as well. By the voluntary I mean, as has been said before,
any of the things in a man's own power which he does with knowledge,
i.e. not in ignorance either of the person acted on or of the instrument
used or of the end that will be attained (e.g. whom he is striking,
with what, and to what end), each such act being done not incidentally
nor under compulsion (e.g. if A takes B's hand and therewith strikes
C, B does not act voluntarily; for the act was not in his own power).
The person struck may be the striker's father, and the striker may
know that it is a man or one of the persons present, but not know
that it is his father; a similar distinction may be made in the case
of the end, and with regard to the whole action. Therefore that which
is done in ignorance, or though not done in ignorance is not in the
agent's power, or is done under compulsion, is involuntary (for many
natural processes, even, we knowingly both perform and experience,
none of which is either voluntary or involuntary; e.g. growing old
or dying). But in the case of unjust and just acts alike the injustice
or justice may be only incidental; for a man might return a deposit
unwillingly and from fear, and then he must not be said either to
do what is just or to act justly, except in an incidental way. Similarly
the man who under compulsion and unwillingly fails to return the deposit
must be said to act unjustly, and to do what is unjust, only incidentally.
Of voluntary acts we do some by choice, others not by choice; by choice
those which we do after deliberation, not by choice those which we
do without previous deliberation. Thus there are three kinds of injury
in transactions between man and man; those done in ignorance are mistakes
when the person acted on, the act, the instrument, or the end that
will be attained is other than the agent supposed; the agent thought
either that he was not hiting any one or that he was not hitting with
this missile or not hitting this person or to this end, but a result
followed other than that which he thought likely (e.g. he threw not
with intent to wound but only to prick), or the person hit or the
missile was other than he supposed. Now when (1) the injury takes
place contrary to reasonable expectation, it is a misadventure. When
(2) it is not contrary to reasonable expectation, but does not imply
vice, it is a mistake (for a man makes a mistake when the fault originates
in him, but is the victim of accident when the origin lies outside
him). When (3) he acts with knowledge but not after deliberation,
it is an act of injustice-e.g. the acts due to anger or to other passions
necessary or natural to man; for when men do such harmful and mistaken
acts they act unjustly, and the acts are acts of injustice, but this
does not imply that the doers are unjust or wicked; for the injury
is not due to vice. But when (4) a man acts from choice, he is an
unjust man and a vicious man. 

Hence acts proceeding from anger are rightly judged not to be done
of malice aforethought; for it is not the man who acts in anger but
he who enraged him that starts the mischief. Again, the matter in
dispute is not whether the thing happened or not, but its justice;
for it is apparent injustice that occasions rage. For they do not
dispute about the occurrence of the act-as in commercial transactions
where one of the two parties must be vicious-unless they do so owing
to forgetfulness; but, agreeing about the fact, they dispute on which
side justice lies (whereas a man who has deliberately injured another
cannot help knowing that he has done so), so that the one thinks he
is being treated unjustly and the other disagrees. 

But if a man harms another by choice, he acts unjustly; and these
are the acts of injustice which imply that the doer is an unjust man,
provided that the act violates proportion or equality. Similarly,
a man is just when he acts justly by choice; but he acts justly if
he merely acts voluntarily. 

Of involuntary acts some are excusable, others not. For the mistakes
which men make not only in ignorance but also from ignorance are excusable,
while those which men do not from ignorance but (though they do them
in ignorance) owing to a passion which is neither natural nor such
as man is liable to, are not excusable. 

9 

Assuming that we have sufficiently defined the suffering and doing
of injustice, it may be asked (1) whether the truth in expressed in
Euripides' paradoxical words: 

I slew my mother, that's my tale in brief. 
Were you both willing, or unwilling both? 

Is it truly possible to be willingly treated unjustly, or is all suffering
of injustice the contrary involuntary, as all unjust action is voluntary?
And is all suffering of injustice of the latter kind or else all of
the former, or is it sometimes voluntary, sometimes involuntary? So,
too, with the case of being justly treated; all just action is voluntary,
so that it is reasonable that there should be a similar opposition
in either case-that both being unjustly and being justly treated should
be either alike voluntary or alike involuntary. But it would be thought
paradoxical even in the case of being justly treated, if it were always
voluntary; for some are unwillingly treated justly. (2) One might
raise this question also, whether every one who has suffered what
is unjust is being unjustly treated, or on the other hand it is with
suffering as with acting. In action and in passivity alike it is possible
to partake of justice incidentally, and similarly (it is plain) of
injustice; for to do what is unjust is not the same as to act unjustly,
nor to suffer what is unjust as to be treated unjustly, and similarly
in the case of acting justly and being justly treated; for it is impossible
to be unjustly treated if the other does not act unjustly, or justly
treated unless he acts justly. Now if to act unjustly is simply to
harm some one voluntarily, and 'voluntarily' means 'knowing the person
acted on, the instrument, and the manner of one's acting', and the
incontinent man voluntarily harms himself, not only will he voluntarily
be unjustly treated but it will be possible to treat oneself unjustly.
(This also is one of the questions in doubt, whether a man can treat
himself unjustly.) Again, a man may voluntarily, owing to incontinence,
be harmed by another who acts voluntarily, so that it would be possible
to be voluntarily treated unjustly. Or is our definition incorrect;
must we to 'harming another, with knowledge both of the person acted
on, of the instrument, and of the manner' add 'contrary to the wish
of the person acted on'? Then a man may be voluntarily harmed and
voluntarily suffer what is unjust, but no one is voluntarily treated
unjustly; for no one wishes to be unjustly treated, not even the incontinent
man. He acts contrary to his wish; for no one wishes for what he does
not think to be good, but the incontinent man does do things that
he does not think he ought to do. Again, one who gives what is his
own, as Homer says Glaucus gave Diomede 

Armour of gold for brazen, the price of a hundred beeves for nine,
is not unjustly treated; for though to give is in his power, to be
unjustly treated is not, but there must be some one to treat him unjustly.
It is plain, then, that being unjustly treated is not voluntary.

Of the questions we intended to discuss two still remain for discussion;
(3) whether it is the man who has assigned to another more than his
share that acts unjustly, or he who has the excessive share, and (4)
whether it is possible to treat oneself unjustly. The questions are
connected; for if the former alternative is possible and the distributor
acts unjustly and not the man who has the excessive share, then if
a man assigns more to another than to himself, knowingly and voluntarily,
he treats himself unjustly; which is what modest people seem to do,
since the virtuous man tends to take less than his share. Or does
this statement too need qualification? For (a) he perhaps gets more
than his share of some other good, e.g. of honour or of intrinsic
nobility. (b) The question is solved by applying the distinction we
applied to unjust action; for he suffers nothing contrary to his own
wish, so that he is not unjustly treated as far as this goes, but
at most only suffers harm. 

It is plain too that the distributor acts unjustly, but not always
the man who has the excessive share; for it is not he to whom what
is unjust appertains that acts unjustly, but he to whom it appertains
to do the unjust act voluntarily, i.e. the person in whom lies the
origin of the action, and this lies in the distributor, not in the
receiver. Again, since the word 'do' is ambiguous, and there is a
sense in which lifeless things, or a hand, or a servant who obeys
an order, may be said to slay, he who gets an excessive share does
not act unjustly, though he 'does' what is unjust. 

Again, if the distributor gave his judgement in ignorance, he does
not act unjustly in respect of legal justice, and his judgement is
not unjust in this sense, but in a sense it is unjust (for legal justice
and primordial justice are different); but if with knowledge he judged
unjustly, he is himself aiming at an excessive share either of gratitude
or of revenge. As much, then, as if he were to share in the plunder,
the man who has judged unjustly for these reasons has got too much;
the fact that what he gets is different from what he distributes makes
no difference, for even if he awards land with a view to sharing in
the plunder he gets not land but money. 

Men think that acting unjustly is in their power, and therefore that
being just is easy. But it is not; to lie with one's neighbour's wife,
to wound another, to deliver a bribe, is easy and in our power, but
to do these things as a result of a certain state of character is
neither easy nor in our power. Similarly to know what is just and
what is unjust requires, men think, no great wisdom, because it is
not hard to understand the matters dealt with by the laws (though
these are not the things that are just, except incidentally); but
how actions must be done and distributions effected in order to be
just, to know this is a greater achievement than knowing what is good
for the health; though even there, while it is easy to know that honey,
wine, hellebore, cautery, and the use of the knife are so, to know
how, to whom, and when these should be applied with a view to producing
health, is no less an achievement than that of being a physician.
Again, for this very reason men think that acting unjustly is characteristic
of the just man no less than of the unjust, because he would be not
less but even more capable of doing each of these unjust acts; for
he could lie with a woman or wound a neighbour; and the brave man
could throw away his shield and turn to flight in this direction or
in that. But to play the coward or to act unjustly consists not in
doing these things, except incidentally, but in doing them as the
result of a certain state of character, just as to practise medicine
and healing consists not in applying or not applying the knife, in
using or not using medicines, but in doing so in a certain way.

Just acts occur between people who participate in things good in themselves
and can have too much or too little of them; for some beings (e.g.
presumably the gods) cannot have too much of them, and to others,
those who are incurably bad, not even the smallest share in them is
beneficial but all such goods are harmful, while to others they are
beneficial up to a point; therefore justice is essentially something
human. 

10 
Our next subject is equity and the equitable (to epiekes), and their
respective relations to justice and the just. For on examination they
appear to be neither absolutely the same nor generically different;
and while we sometime praise what is equitable and the equitable man
(so that we apply the name by way of praise even to instances of the
other virtues, instead of 'good' meaning by epieikestebon that a thing
is better), at other times, when we reason it out, it seems strange
if the equitable, being something different from the just, is yet
praiseworthy; for either the just or the equitable is not good, if
they are different; or, if both are good, they are the same.

These, then, are pretty much the considerations that give rise to
the problem about the equitable; they are all in a sense correct and
not opposed to one another; for the equitable, though it is better
than one kind of justice, yet is just, and it is not as being a different
class of thing that it is better than the just. The same thing, then,
is just and equitable, and while both are good the equitable is superior.
What creates the problem is that the equitable is just, but not the
legally just but a correction of legal justice. The reason is that
all law is universal but about some things it is not possible to make
a universal statement which shall be correct. In those cases, then,
in which it is necessary to speak universally, but not possible to
do so correctly, the law takes the usual case, though it is not ignorant
of the possibility of error. And it is none the less correct; for
the error is in the law nor in the legislator but in the nature of
the thing, since the matter of practical affairs is of this kind from
the start. When the law speaks universally, then, and a case arises
on it which is not covered by the universal statement, then it is
right, where the legislator fails us and has erred by oversimplicity,
to correct the omission-to say what the legislator himself would have
said had he been present, and would have put into his law if he had
known. Hence the equitable is just, and better than one kind of justice-not
better than absolute justice but better than the error that arises
from the absoluteness of the statement. And this is the nature of
the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to
its universality. In fact this is the reason why all things are not
determined by law, that about some things it is impossible to lay
down a law, so that a decree is needed. For when the thing is indefinite
the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule used in making the
Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone
and is not rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts.

It is plain, then, what the equitable is, and that it is just and
is better than one kind of justice. It is evident also from this who
the equitable man is; the man who chooses and does such acts, and
is no stickler for his rights in a bad sense but tends to take less
than his share though he has the law oft his side, is equitable, and
this state of character is equity, which is a sort of justice and
not a different state of character. 

11 

Whether a man can treat himself unjustly or not, is evident from what
has been said. For (a) one class of just acts are those acts in accordance
with any virtue which are prescribed by the law; e.g. the law does
not expressly permit suicide, and what it does not expressly permit
it forbids. Again, when a man in violation of the law harms another
(otherwise than in retaliation) voluntarily, he acts unjustly, and
a voluntary agent is one who knows both the person he is affecting
by his action and the instrument he is using; and he who through anger
voluntarily stabs himself does this contrary to the right rule of
life, and this the law does not allow; therefore he is acting unjustly.
But towards whom? Surely towards the state, not towards himself. For
he suffers voluntarily, but no one is voluntarily treated unjustly.
This is also the reason why the state punishes; a certain loss of
civil rights attaches to the man who destroys himself, on the ground
that he is treating the state unjustly. 

Further (b) in that sense of 'acting unjustly' in which the man who
'acts unjustly' is unjust only and not bad all round, it is not possible
to treat oneself unjustly (this is different from the former sense;
the unjust man in one sense of the term is wicked in a particularized
way just as the coward is, not in the sense of being wicked all round,
so that his 'unjust act' does not manifest wickedness in general).
For (i) that would imply the possibility of the same thing's having
been subtracted from and added to the same thing at the same time;
but this is impossible-the just and the unjust always involve more
than one person. Further, (ii) unjust action is voluntary and done
by choice, and takes the initiative (for the man who because he has
suffered does the same in return is not thought to act unjustly);
but if a man harms himself he suffers and does the same things at
the same time. Further, (iii) if a man could treat himself unjustly,
he could be voluntarily treated unjustly. Besides, (iv) no one acts
unjustly without committing particular acts of injustice; but no one
can commit adultery with his own wife or housebreaking on his own
house or theft on his own property, 

In general, the question 'can a man treat himself unjustly?' is solved
also by the distinction we applied to the question 'can a man be voluntarily
treated unjustly?' 

(It is evident too that both are bad, being unjustly treated and acting
unjustly; for the one means having less and the other having more
than the intermediate amount, which plays the part here that the healthy
does in the medical art, and that good condition does in the art of
bodily training. But still acting unjustly is the worse, for it involves
vice and is blameworthy-involves vice which is either of the complete
and unqualified kind or almost so (we must admit the latter alternative,
because not all voluntary unjust action implies injustice as a state
of character), while being unjustly treated does not involve vice
and injustice in oneself. In itself, then, being unjustly treated
is less bad, but there is nothing to prevent its being incidentally
a greater evil. But theory cares nothing for this; it calls pleurisy
a more serious mischief than a stumble; yet the latter may become
incidentally the more serious, if the fall due to it leads to your
being taken prisoner or put to death the enemy.) 

Metaphorically and in virtue of a certain resemblance there is a justice,
not indeed between a man and himself, but between certain parts of
him; yet not every kind of justice but that of master and servant
or that of husband and wife. For these are the ratios in which the
part of the soul that has a rational principle stands to the irrational
part; and it is with a view to these parts that people also think
a man can be unjust to himself, viz. because these parts are liable
to suffer something contrary to their respective desires; there is
therefore thought to be a mutual justice between them as between ruler
and ruled. 

Let this be taken as our account of justice and the other, i.e. the
other moral, virtues. 



BOOK VI

1 

Since we have previously said that one ought to choose that which
is intermediate, not the excess nor the defect, and that the intermediate
is determined by the dictates of the right rule, let us discuss the
nature of these dictates. In all the states of character we have mentioned,
as in all other matters, there is a mark to which the man who has
the rule looks, and heightens or relaxes his activity accordingly,
and there is a standard which determines the mean states which we
say are intermediate between excess and defect, being in accordance
with the right rule. But such a statement, though true, is by no means
clear; for not only here but in all other pursuits which are objects
of knowledge it is indeed true to say that we must not exert ourselves
nor relax our efforts too much nor too little, but to an intermediate
extent and as the right rule dictates; but if a man had only this
knowledge he would be none the wiser e.g. we should not know what
sort of medicines to apply to our body if some one were to say 'all
those which the medical art prescribes, and which agree with the practice
of one who possesses the art'. Hence it is necessary with regard to
the states of the soul also not only that this true statement should
be made, but also that it should be determined what is the right rule
and what is the standard that fixes it. 

We divided the virtues of the soul and a said that some are virtues
of character and others of intellect. Now we have discussed in detail
the moral virtues; with regard to the others let us express our view
as follows, beginning with some remarks about the soul. We said before
that there are two parts of the soul-that which grasps a rule or rational
principle, and the irrational; let us now draw a similar distinction
within the part which grasps a rational principle. And let it be assumed
that there are two parts which grasp a rational principle-one by which
we contemplate the kind of things whose originative causes are invariable,
and one by which we contemplate variable things; for where objects
differ in kind the part of the soul answering to each of the two is
different in kind, since it is in virtue of a certain likeness and
kinship with their objects that they have the knowledge they have.
Let one of these parts be called the scientific and the other the
calculative; for to deliberate and to calculate are the same thing,
but no one deliberates about the invariable. Therefore the calculative
is one part of the faculty which grasps a rational principle. We must,
then, learn what is the best state of each of these two parts; for
this is the virtue of each. 

2 

The virtue of a thing is relative to its proper work. Now there are
three things in the soul which control action and truth-sensation,
reason, desire. 

Of these sensation originates no action; this is plain from the fact
that the lower animals have sensation but no share in action.

What affirmation and negation are in thinking, pursuit and avoidance
are in desire; so that since moral virtue is a state of character
concerned with choice, and choice is deliberate desire, therefore
both the reasoning must be true and the desire right, if the choice
is to be good, and the latter must pursue just what the former asserts.
Now this kind of intellect and of truth is practical; of the intellect
which is contemplative, not practical nor productive, the good and
the bad state are truth and falsity respectively (for this is the
work of everything intellectual); while of the part which is practical
and intellectual the good state is truth in agreement with right desire.

The origin of action-its efficient, not its final cause-is choice,
and that of choice is desire and reasoning with a view to an end.
This is why choice cannot exist either without reason and intellect
or without a moral state; for good action and its opposite cannot
exist without a combination of intellect and character. Intellect
itself, however, moves nothing, but only the intellect which aims
at an end and is practical; for this rules the productive intellect,
as well, since every one who makes makes for an end, and that which
is made is not an end in the unqualified sense (but only an end in
a particular relation, and the end of a particular operation)-only
that which is done is that; for good action is an end, and desire
aims at this. Hence choice is either desiderative reason or ratiocinative
desire, and such an origin of action is a man. (It is to be noted
that nothing that is past is an object of choice, e.g. no one chooses
to have sacked Troy; for no one deliberates about the past, but about
what is future and capable of being otherwise, while what is past
is not capable of not having taken place; hence Agathon is right in
saying 

For this alone is lacking even to God, 
To make undone things thathave once been done.) 

The work of both the intellectual parts, then, is truth. Therefore
the states that are most strictly those in respect of which each of
these parts will reach truth are the virtues of the two parts.

3 

Let us begin, then, from the beginning, and discuss these states once
more. Let it be assumed that the states by virtue of which the soul
possesses truth by way of affirmation or denial are five in number,
i.e. art, scientific knowledge, practical wisdom, philosophic wisdom,
intuitive reason; we do not include judgement and opinion because
in these we may be mistaken. 

Now what scientific knowledge is, if we are to speak exactly and not
follow mere similarities, is plain from what follows. We all suppose
that what we know is not even capable of being otherwise; of things
capable of being otherwise we do not know, when they have passed outside
our observation, whether they exist or not. Therefore the object of
scientific knowledge is of necessity. Therefore it is eternal; for
things that are of necessity in the unqualified sense are all eternal;
and things that are eternal are ungenerated and imperishable. Again,
every science is thought to be capable of being taught, and its object
of being learned. And all teaching starts from what is already known,
as we maintain in the Analytics also; for it proceeds sometimes through
induction and sometimes by syllogism. Now induction is the starting-point
which knowledge even of the universal presupposes, while syllogism
proceeds from universals. There are therefore starting-points from
which syllogism proceeds, which are not reached by syllogism; it is
therefore by induction that they are acquired. Scientific knowledge
is, then, a state of capacity to demonstrate, and has the other limiting
characteristics which we specify in the Analytics, for it is when
a man believes in a certain way and the starting-points are known
to him that he has scientific knowledge, since if they are not better
known to him than the conclusion, he will have his knowledge only
incidentally. 

Let this, then, be taken as our account of scientific knowledge.

4 

In the variable are included both things made and things done; making
and acting are different (for their nature we treat even the discussions
outside our school as reliable); so that the reasoned state of capacity
to act is different from the reasoned state of capacity to make. Hence
too they are not included one in the other; for neither is acting
making nor is making acting. Now since architecture is an art and
is essentially a reasoned state of capacity to make, and there is
neither any art that is not such a state nor any such state that is
not an art, art is identical with a state of capacity to make, involving
a true course of reasoning. All art is concerned with coming into
being, i.e. with contriving and considering how something may come
into being which is capable of either being or not being, and whose
origin is in the maker and not in the thing made; for art is concerned
neither with things that are, or come into being, by necessity, nor
with things that do so in accordance with nature (since these have
their origin in themselves). Making and acting being different, art
must be a matter of making, not of acting. And in a sense chance and
art are concerned with the same objects; as Agathon says, 'art loves
chance and chance loves art'. Art, then, as has been is a state concerned
with making, involving a true course of reasoning, and lack of art
on the contrary is a state concerned with making, involving a false
course of reasoning; both are concerned with the variable.

5 

Regarding practical wisdom we shall get at the truth by considering
who are the persons we credit with it. Now it is thought to be the
mark of a man of practical wisdom to be able to deliberate well about
what is good and expedient for himself, not in some particular respect,
e.g. about what sorts of thing conduce to health or to strength, but
about what sorts of thing conduce to the good life in general. This
is shown by the fact that we credit men with practical wisdom in some
particular respect when they have calculated well with a view to some
good end which is one of those that are not the object of any art.
It follows that in the general sense also the man who is capable of
deliberating has practical wisdom. Now no one deliberates about things
that are invariable, nor about things that it is impossible for him
to do. Therefore, since scientific knowledge involves demonstration,
but there is no demonstration of things whose first principles are
variable (for all such things might actually be otherwise), and since
it is impossible to deliberate about things that are of necessity,
practical wisdom cannot be scientific knowledge nor art; not science
because that which can be done is capable of being otherwise, not
art because action and making are different kinds of thing. The remaining
alternative, then, is that it is a true and reasoned state of capacity
to act with regard to the things that are good or bad for man. For
while making has an end other than itself, action cannot; for good
action itself is its end. It is for this reason that we think Pericles
and men like him have practical wisdom, viz. because they can see
what is good for themselves and what is good for men in general; we
consider that those can do this who are good at managing households
or states. (This is why we call temperance (sophrosune) by this name;
we imply that it preserves one's practical wisdom (sozousa tan phronsin).
Now what it preserves is a judgement of the kind we have described.
For it is not any and every judgement that pleasant and painful objects
destroy and pervert, e.g. the judgement that the triangle has or has
not its angles equal to two right angles, but only judgements about
what is to be done. For the originating causes of the things that
are done consist in the end at which they are aimed; but the man who
has been ruined by pleasure or pain forthwith fails to see any such
originating cause-to see that for the sake of this or because of this
he ought to choose and do whatever he chooses and does; for vice is
destructive of the originating cause of action.) Practical wisdom,
then, must be a reasoned and true state of capacity to act with regard
to human goods. But further, while there is such a thing as excellence
in art, there is no such thing as excellence in practical wisdom;
and in art he who errs willingly is preferable, but in practical wisdom,
as in the virtues, he is the reverse. Plainly, then, practical wisdom
is a virtue and not an art. There being two parts of the soul that
can follow a course of reasoning, it must be the virtue of one of
the two, i.e. of that part which forms opinions; for opinion is about
the variable and so is practical wisdom. But yet it is not only a
reasoned state; this is shown by the fact that a state of that sort
may forgotten but practical wisdom cannot. 

6 

Scientific knowledge is judgement about things that are universal
and necessary, and the conclusions of demonstration, and all scientific
knowledge, follow from first principles (for scientific knowledge
involves apprehension of a rational ground). This being so, the first
principle from which what is scientifically known follows cannot be
an object of scientific knowledge, of art, or of practical wisdom;
for that which can be scientifically known can be demonstrated, and
art and practical wisdom deal with things that are variable. Nor are
these first principles the objects of philosophic wisdom, for it is
a mark of the philosopher to have demonstration about some things.
If, then, the states of mind by which we have truth and are never
deceived about things invariable or even variable are scientific knowlededge,
practical wisdom, philosophic wisdom, and intuitive reason, and it
cannot be any of the three (i.e. practical wisdom, scientific knowledge,
or philosophic wisdom), the remaining alternative is that it is intuitive
reason that grasps the first principles. 

7 

Wisdom (1) in the arts we ascribe to their most finished exponents,
e.g. to Phidias as a sculptor and to Polyclitus as a maker of portrait-statues,
and here we mean nothing by wisdom except excellence in art; but (2)
we think that some people are wise in general, not in some particular
field or in any other limited respect, as Homer says in the Margites,

Him did the gods make neither a digger nor yet a ploughman

Nor wise in anything else. Therefore wisdom must plainly be the most
finished of the forms of knowledge. It follows that the wise man must
not only know what follows from the first principles, but must also
possess truth about the first principles. Therefore wisdom must be
intuitive reason combined with scientific knowledge-scientific knowledge
of the highest objects which has received as it were its proper completion.

Of the highest objects, we say; for it would be strange to think that
the art of politics, or practical wisdom, is the best knowledge, since
man is not the best thing in the world. Now if what is healthy or
good is different for men and for fishes, but what is white or straight
is always the same, any one would say that what is wise is the same
but what is practically wise is different; for it is to that which
observes well the various matters concerning itself that one ascribes
practical wisdom, and it is to this that one will entrust such matters.
This is why we say that some even of the lower animals have practical
wisdom, viz. those which are found to have a power of foresight with
regard to their own life. It is evident also that philosophic wisdom
and the art of politics cannot be the same; for if the state of mind
concerned with a man's own interests is to be called philosophic wisdom,
there will be many philosophic wisdoms; there will not be one concerned
with the good of all animals (any more than there is one art of medicine
for all existing things), but a different philosophic wisdom about
the good of each species. 

But if the argument be that man is the best of the animals, this makes
no difference; for there are other things much more divine in their
nature even than man, e.g., most conspicuously, the bodies of which
the heavens are framed. From what has been said it is plain, then,
that philosophic wisdom is scientific knowledge, combined with intuitive
reason, of the things that are highest by nature. This is why we say
Anaxagoras, Thales, and men like them have philosophic but not practical
wisdom, when we see them ignorant of what is to their own advantage,
and why we say that they know things that are remarkable, admirable,
difficult, and divine, but useless; viz. because it is not human goods
that they seek. 

Practical wisdom on the other hand is concerned with things human
and things about which it is possible to deliberate; for we say this
is above all the work of the man of practical wisdom, to deliberate
well, but no one deliberates about things invariable, nor about things
which have not an end, and that a good that can be brought about by
action. The man who is without qualification good at deliberating
is the man who is capable of aiming in accordance with calculation
at the best for man of things attainable by action. Nor is practical
wisdom concerned with universals only-it must also recognize the particulars;
for it is practical, and practice is concerned with particulars. This
is why some who do not know, and especially those who have experience,
are more practical than others who know; for if a man knew that light
meats are digestible and wholesome, but did not know which sorts of
meat are light, he would not produce health, but the man who knows
that chicken is wholesome is more likely to produce health.

Now practical wisdom is concerned with action; therefore one should
have both forms of it, or the latter in preference to the former.
But of practical as of philosophic wisdom there must be a controlling
kind. 

8 

Political wisdom and practical wisdom are the same state of mind,
but their essence is not the same. Of the wisdom concerned with the
city, the practical wisdom which plays a controlling part is legislative
wisdom, while that which is related to this as particulars to their
universal is known by the general name 'political wisdom'; this has
to do with action and deliberation, for a decree is a thing to be
carried out in the form of an individual act. This is why the exponents
of this art are alone said to 'take part in politics'; for these alone
'do things' as manual labourers 'do things'. 

Practical wisdom also is identified especially with that form of it
which is concerned with a man himself-with the individual; and this
is known by the general name 'practical wisdom'; of the other kinds
one is called household management, another legislation, the third
politics, and of the latter one part is called deliberative and the
other judicial. Now knowing what is good for oneself will be one kind
of knowledge, but it is very different from the other kinds; and the
man who knows and concerns himself with his own interests is thought
to have practical wisdom, while politicians are thought to be busybodies;
hence the word of Euripides, 

But how could I be wise, who might at ease, 
Numbered among the army's multitude, 
Have had an equal share? 
For those who aim too high and do too much. Those who think thus seek
their own good, and consider that one ought to do so. From this opinion,
then, has come the view that such men have practical wisdom; yet perhaps
one's own good cannot exist without household management, nor without
a form of government. Further, how one should order one's own affairs
is not clear and needs inquiry. 

What has been said is confirmed by the fact that while young men become
geometricians and mathematicians and wise in matters like these, it
is thought that a young man of practical wisdom cannot be found. The
cause is that such wisdom is concerned not only with universals but
with particulars, which become familiar from experience, but a young
man has no experience, for it is length of time that gives experience;
indeed one might ask this question too, why a boy may become a mathematician,
but not a philosopher or a physicist. It is because the objects of
mathematics exist by abstraction, while the first principles of these
other subjects come from experience, and because young men have no
conviction about the latter but merely use the proper language, while
the essence of mathematical objects is plain enough to them?

Further, error in deliberation may be either about the universal or
about the particular; we may fall to know either that all water that
weighs heavy is bad, or that this particular water weighs heavy.

That practical wisdom is not scientific knowledge is evident; for
it is, as has been said, concerned with the ultimate particular fact,
since the thing to be done is of this nature. It is opposed, then,
to intuitive reason; for intuitive reason is of the limiting premisses,
for which no reason can be given, while practical wisdom is concerned
with the ultimate particular, which is the object not of scientific
knowledge but of perception-not the perception of qualities peculiar
to one sense but a perception akin to that by which we perceive that
the particular figure before us is a triangle; for in that direction
as well as in that of the major premiss there will be a limit. But
this is rather perception than practical wisdom, though it is another
kind of perception than that of the qualities peculiar to each sense.

9 

There is a difference between inquiry and deliberation; for deliberation
is inquiry into a particular kind of thing. We must grasp the nature
of excellence in deliberation as well whether it is a form of scientific
knowledge, or opinion, or skill in conjecture, or some other kind
of thing. Scientific knowledge it is not; for men do not inquire about
the things they know about, but good deliberation is a kind of deliberation,
and he who deliberates inquires and calculates. Nor is it skill in
conjecture; for this both involves no reasoning and is something that
is quick in its operation, while men deliberate a long time, and they
say that one should carry out quickly the conclusions of one's deliberation,
but should deliberate slowly. Again, readiness of mind is different
from excellence in deliberation; it is a sort of skill in conjecture.
Nor again is excellence in deliberation opinion of any sort. But since
the man who deliberates badly makes a mistake, while he who deliberates
well does so correctly, excellence in deliberation is clearly a kind
of correctness, but neither of knowledge nor of opinion; for there
is no such thing as correctness of knowledge (since there is no such
thing as error of knowledge), and correctness of opinion is truth;
and at the same time everything that is an object of opinion is already
determined. But again excellence in deliberation involves reasoning.
The remaining alternative, then, is that it is correctness of thinking;
for this is not yet assertion, since, while even opinion is not inquiry
but has reached the stage of assertion, the man who is deliberating,
whether he does so well or ill, is searching for something and calculating.

But excellence in deliberation is a certain correctness of deliberation;
hence we must first inquire what deliberation is and what it is about.
And, there being more than one kind of correctness, plainly excellence
in deliberation is not any and every kind; for (1) the incontinent
man and the bad man, if he is clever, will reach as a result of his
calculation what he sets before himself, so that he will have deliberated
correctly, but he will have got for himself a great evil. Now to have
deliberated well is thought to be a good thing; for it is this kind
of correctness of deliberation that is excellence in deliberation,
viz. that which tends to attain what is good. But (2) it is possible
to attain even good by a false syllogism, and to attain what one ought
to do but not by the right means, the middle term being false; so
that this too is not yet excellence in deliberation this state in
virtue of which one attains what one ought but not by the right means.
Again (3) it is possible to attain it by long deliberation while another
man attains it quickly. Therefore in the former case we have not yet
got excellence in deliberation, which is rightness with regard to
the expedient-rightness in respect both of the end, the manner, and
the time. (4) Further it is possible to have deliberated well either
in the unqualified sense or with reference to a particular end. Excellence
in deliberation in the unqualified sense, then, is that which succeeds
with reference to what is the end in the unqualified sense, and excellence
in deliberation in a particular sense is that which succeeds relatively
to a particular end. If, then, it is characteristic of men of practical
wisdom to have deliberated well, excellence in deliberation will be
correctness with regard to what conduces to the end of which practical
wisdom is the true apprehension. 

10 

Understanding, also, and goodness of understanding, in virtue of which
men are said to be men of understanding or of good understanding,
are neither entirely the same as opinion or scientific knowledge (for
at that rate all men would have been men of understanding), nor are
they one of the particular sciences, such as medicine, the science
of things connected with health, or geometry, the science of spatial
magnitudes. For understanding is neither about things that are always
and are unchangeable, nor about any and every one of the things that
come into being, but about things which may become subjects of questioning
and deliberation. Hence it is about the same objects as practical
wisdom; but understanding and practical wisdom are not the same. For
practical wisdom issues commands, since its end is what ought to be
done or not to be done; but understanding only judges. (Understanding
is identical with goodness of understanding, men of understanding
with men of good understanding.) Now understanding is neither the
having nor the acquiring of practical wisdom; but as learning is called
understanding when it means the exercise of the faculty of knowledge,
so 'understanding' is applicable to the exercise of the faculty of
opinion for the purpose of judging of what some one else says about
matters with which practical wisdom is concerned-and of judging soundly;
for 'well' and 'soundly' are the same thing. And from this has come
the use of the name 'understanding' in virtue of which men are said
to be 'of good understanding', viz. from the application of the word
to the grasping of scientific truth; for we often call such grasping
understanding. 

11 

What is called judgement, in virtue of which men are said to 'be sympathetic
judges' and to 'have judgement', is the right discrimination of the
equitable. This is shown by the fact that we say the equitable man
is above all others a man of sympathetic judgement, and identify equity
with sympathetic judgement about certain facts. And sympathetic judgement
is judgement which discriminates what is equitable and does so correctly;
and correct judgement is that which judges what is true.

Now all the states we have considered converge, as might be expected,
to the same point; for when we speak of judgement and understanding
and practical wisdom and intuitive reason we credit the same people
with possessing judgement and having reached years of reason and with
having practical wisdom and understanding. For all these faculties
deal with ultimates, i.e. with particulars; and being a man of understanding
and of good or sympathetic judgement consists in being able judge
about the things with which practical wisdom is concerned; for the
equities are common to all good men in relation to other men. Now
all things which have to be done are included among particulars or
ultimates; for not only must the man of practical wisdom know particular
facts, but understanding and judgement are also concerned with things
to be done, and these are ultimates. And intuitive reason is concerned
with the ultimates in both directions; for both the first terms and
the last are objects of intuitive reason and not of argument, and
the intuitive reason which is presupposed by demonstrations grasps
the unchangeable and first terms, while the intuitive reason involved
in practical reasonings grasps the last and variable fact, i.e. the
minor premiss. For these variable facts are the starting-points for
the apprehension of the end, since the universals are reached from
the particulars; of these therefore we must have perception, and this
perception is intuitive reason. 

This is why these states are thought to be natural endowments-why,
while no one is thought to be a philosopher by nature, people are
thought to have by nature judgement, understanding, and intuitive
reason. This is shown by the fact that we think our powers correspond
to our time of life, and that a particular age brings with it intuitive
reason and judgement; this implies that nature is the cause. (Hence
intuitive reason is both beginning and end; for demonstrations are
from these and about these.) Therefore we ought to attend to the undemonstrated
sayings and opinions of experienced and older people or of people
of practical wisdom not less than to demonstrations; for because experience
has given them an eye they see aright. 

We have stated, then, what practical and philosophic wisdom are, and
with what each of them is concerned, and we have said that each is
the virtue of a different part of the soul. 

12 

Difficulties might be raised as to the utility of these qualities
of mind. For (1) philosophic wisdom will contemplate none of the things
that will make a man happy (for it is not concerned with any coming
into being), and though practical wisdom has this merit, for what
purpose do we need it? Practical wisdom is the quality of mind concerned
with things just and noble and good for man, but these are the things
which it is the mark of a good man to do, and we are none the more
able to act for knowing them if the virtues are states of character,
just as we are none the better able to act for knowing the things
that are healthy and sound, in the sense not of producing but of issuing
from the state of health; for we are none the more able to act for
having the art of medicine or of gymnastics. But (2) if we are to
say that a man should have practical wisdom not for the sake of knowing
moral truths but for the sake of becoming good, practical wisdom will
be of no use to those who are good; again it is of no use to those
who have not virtue; for it will make no difference whether they have
practical wisdom themselves or obey others who have it, and it would
be enough for us to do what we do in the case of health; though we
wish to become healthy, yet we do not learn the art of medicine. (3)
Besides this, it would be thought strange if practical wisdom, being
inferior to philosophic wisdom, is to be put in authority over it,
as seems to be implied by the fact that the art which produces anything
rules and issues commands about that thing. 

These, then, are the questions we must discuss; so far we have only
stated the difficulties. 

(1) Now first let us say that in themselves these states must be worthy
of choice because they are the virtues of the two parts of the soul
respectively, even if neither of them produce anything. 

(2) Secondly, they do produce something, not as the art of medicine
produces health, however, but as health produces health; so does philosophic
wisdom produce happiness; for, being a part of virtue entire, by being
possessed and by actualizing itself it makes a man happy.

(3) Again, the work of man is achieved only in accordance with practical
wisdom as well as with moral virtue; for virtue makes us aim at the
right mark, and practical wisdom makes us take the right means. (Of
the fourth part of the soul-the nutritive-there is no such virtue;
for there is nothing which it is in its power to do or not to do., 4) With regard to our being none the more able to do because of our
practical wisdom what is noble and just, let us begin a little further
back, starting with the following principle. As we say that some people
who do just acts are not necessarily just, i.e. those who do the acts
ordained by the laws either unwillingly or owing to ignorance or for
some other reason and not for the sake of the acts themselves (though,
to be sure, they do what they should and all the things that the good
man ought), so is it, it seems, that in order to be good one must
be in a certain state when one does the several acts, i.e. one must
do them as a result of choice and for the sake of the acts themselves.
Now virtue makes the choice right, but the question of the things
which should naturally be done to carry out our choice belongs not
to virtue but to another faculty. We must devote our attention to
these matters and give a clearer statement about them. There is a
faculty which is called cleverness; and this is such as to be able
to do the things that tend towards the mark we have set before ourselves,
and to hit it. Now if the mark be noble, the cleverness is laudable,
but if the mark be bad, the cleverness is mere smartness; hence we
call even men of practical wisdom clever or smart. Practical wisdom
is not the faculty, but it does not exist without this faculty. And
this eye of the soul acquires its formed state not without the aid
of virtue, as has been said and is plain; for the syllogisms which
deal with acts to be done are things which involve a starting-point,
viz. 'since the end, i.e. what is best, is of such and such a nature',
whatever it may be (let it for the sake of argument be what we please);
and this is not evident except to the good man; for wickedness perverts
us and causes us to be deceived about the starting-points of action.
Therefore it is evident that it is impossible to be practically wise
without being good. 

13 

We must therefore consider virtue also once more; for virtue too is
similarly related; as practical wisdom is to cleverness-not the same,
but like it-so is natural virtue to virtue in the strict sense. For
all men think that each type of character belongs to its possessors
in some sense by nature; for from the very moment of birth we are
just or fitted for selfcontrol or brave or have the other moral qualities;
but yet we seek something else as that which is good in the strict
sense-we seek for the presence of such qualities in another way. For
both children and brutes have the natural dispositions to these qualities,
but without reason these are evidently hurtful. Only we seem to see
this much, that, while one may be led astray by them, as a strong
body which moves without sight may stumble badly because of its lack
of sight, still, if a man once acquires reason, that makes a difference
in action; and his state, while still like what it was, will then
be virtue in the strict sense. Therefore, as in the part of us which
forms opinions there are two types, cleverness and practical wisdom,
so too in the moral part there are two types, natural virtue and virtue
in the strict sense, and of these the latter involves practical wisdom.
This is why some say that all the virtues are forms of practical wisdom,
and why Socrates in one respect was on the right track while in another
he went astray; in thinking that all the virtues were forms of practical
wisdom he was wrong, but in saying they implied practical wisdom he
was right. This is confirmed by the fact that even now all men, when
they define virtue, after naming the state of character and its objects
add 'that (state) which is in accordance with the right rule'; now
the right rule is that which is in accordance with practical wisdom.
All men, then, seem somehow to divine that this kind of state is virtue,
viz. that which is in accordance with practical wisdom. But we must
go a little further. For it is not merely the state in accordance
with the right rule, but the state that implies the presence of the
right rule, that is virtue; and practical wisdom is a right rule about
such matters. Socrates, then, thought the virtues were rules or rational
principles (for he thought they were, all of them, forms of scientific
knowledge), while we think they involve a rational principle.

It is clear, then, from what has been said, that it is not possible
to be good in the strict sense without practical wisdom, nor practically
wise without moral virtue. But in this way we may also refute the
dialectical argument whereby it might be contended that the virtues
exist in separation from each other; the same man, it might be said,
is not best equipped by nature for all the virtues, so that he will
have already acquired one when he has not yet acquired another. This
is possible in respect of the natural virtues, but not in respect
of those in respect of which a man is called without qualification
good; for with the presence of the one quality, practical wisdom,
will be given all the virtues. And it is plain that, even if it were
of no practical value, we should have needed it because it is the
virtue of the part of us in question; plain too that the choice will
not be right without practical wisdom any more than without virtue;
for the one deter, mines the end and the other makes us do the things
that lead to the end. 

But again it is not supreme over philosophic wisdom, i.e. over the
superior part of us, any more than the art of medicine is over health;
for it does not use it but provides for its coming into being; it
issues orders, then, for its sake, but not to it. Further, to maintain
its supremacy would be like saying that the art of politics rules
the gods because it issues orders about all the affairs of the state.



BOOK VII

1 

Let us now make a fresh beginning and point out that of moral states
to be avoided there are three kinds-vice, incontinence, brutishness.
The contraries of two of these are evident,-one we call virtue, the
other continence; to brutishness it would be most fitting to oppose
superhuman virtue, a heroic and divine kind of virtue, as Homer has
represented Priam saying of Hector that he was very good,

For he seemed not, he, 
The child of a mortal man, but as one that of God's seed came.

Therefore if, as they say, men become gods by excess of virtue, of
this kind must evidently be the state opposed to the brutish state;
for as a brute has no vice or virtue, so neither has a god; his state
is higher than virtue, and that of a brute is a different kind of
state from vice. 

Now, since it is rarely that a godlike man is found-to use the epithet
of the Spartans, who when they admire any one highly call him a 'godlike
man'-so too the brutish type is rarely found among men; it is found
chiefly among barbarians, but some brutish qualities are also produced
by disease or deformity; and we also call by this evil name those
men who go beyond all ordinary standards by reason of vice. Of this
kind of disposition, however, we must later make some mention, while
we have discussed vice before we must now discuss incontinence and
softness (or effeminacy), and continence and endurance; for we must
treat each of the two neither as identical with virtue or wickedness,
nor as a different genus. We must, as in all other cases, set the
observed facts before us and, after first discussing the difficulties,
go on to prove, if possible, the truth of all the common opinions
about these affections of the mind, or, failing this, of the greater
number and the most authoritative; for if we both refute the objections
and leave the common opinions undisturbed, we shall have proved the
case sufficiently. 

Now (1) both continence and endurance are thought to be included among
things good and praiseworthy, and both incontinence and soft, ness
among things bad and blameworthy; and the same man is thought to be
continent and ready to abide by the result of his calculations, or
incontinent and ready to abandon them. And (2) the incontinent man,
knowing that what he does is bad, does it as a result of passion,
while the continent man, knowing that his appetites are bad, refuses
on account of his rational principle to follow them (3) The temperate
man all men call continent and disposed to endurance, while the continent
man some maintain to be always temperate but others do not; and some
call the self-indulgent man incontinent and the incontinent man selfindulgent
indiscriminately, while others distinguish them. (4) The man of practical
wisdom, they sometimes say, cannot be incontinent, while sometimes
they say that some who are practically wise and clever are incontinent.
Again (5) men are said to be incontinent even with respect to anger,
honour, and gain.-These, then, are the things that are said.

2 

Now we may ask (1) how a man who judges rightly can behave incontinently.
That he should behave so when he has knowledge, some say is impossible;
for it would be strange-so Socrates thought-if when knowledge was
in a man something else could master it and drag it about like a slave.
For Socrates was entirely opposed to the view in question, holding
that there is no such thing as incontinence; no one, he said, when
he judges acts against what he judges best-people act so only by reason
of ignorance. Now this view plainly contradicts the observed facts,
and we must inquire about what happens to such a man; if he acts by
reason of ignorance, what is the manner of his ignorance? For that
the man who behaves incontinently does not, before he gets into this
state, think he ought to act so, is evident. But there are some who
concede certain of Socrates' contentions but not others; that nothing
is stronger than knowledge they admit, but not that on one acts contrary
to what has seemed to him the better course, and therefore they say
that the incontinent man has not knowledge when he is mastered by
his pleasures, but opinion. But if it is opinion and not knowledge,
if it is not a strong conviction that resists but a weak one, as in
men who hesitate, we sympathize with their failure to stand by such
convictions against strong appetites; but we do not sympathize with
wickedness, nor with any of the other blameworthy states. Is it then
practical wisdom whose resistance is mastered? That is the strongest
of all states. But this is absurd; the same man will be at once practically
wise and incontinent, but no one would say that it is the part of
a practically wise man to do willingly the basest acts. Besides, it
has been shown before that the man of practical wisdom is one who
will act (for he is a man concerned with the individual facts) and
who has the other virtues. 

(2) Further, if continence involves having strong and bad appetites,
the temperate man will not be continent nor the continent man temperate;
for a temperate man will have neither excessive nor bad appetites.
But the continent man must; for if the appetites are good, the state
of character that restrains us from following them is bad, so that
not all continence will be good; while if they are weak and not bad,
there is nothing admirable in resisting them, and if they are weak
and bad, there is nothing great in resisting these either.

(3) Further, if continence makes a man ready to stand by any and every
opinion, it is bad, i.e. if it makes him stand even by a false opinion;
and if incontinence makes a man apt to abandon any and every opinion,
there will be a good incontinence, of which Sophocles' Neoptolemus
in the Philoctetes will be an instance; for he is to be praised for
not standing by what Odysseus persuaded him to do, because he is pained
at telling a lie. 

(4) Further, the sophistic argument presents a difficulty; the syllogism
arising from men's wish to expose paradoxical results arising from
an opponent's view, in order that they may be admired when they succeed,
is one that puts us in a difficulty (for thought is bound fast when
it will not rest because the conclusion does not satisfy it, and cannot
advance because it cannot refute the argument). There is an argument
from which it follows that folly coupled with incontinence is virtue;
for a man does the opposite of what he judges, owing to incontinence,
but judges what is good to be evil and something that he should not
do, and consequence he will do what is good and not what is evil.

(5) Further, he who on conviction does and pursues and chooses what
is pleasant would be thought to be better than one who does so as
a result not of calculation but of incontinence; for he is easier
to cure since he may be persuaded to change his mind. But to the incontinent
man may be applied the proverb 'when water chokes, what is one to
wash it down with?' If he had been persuaded of the rightness of what
he does, he would have desisted when he was persuaded to change his
mind; but now he acts in spite of his being persuaded of something
quite different. 

(6) Further, if incontinence and continence are concerned with any
and every kind of object, who is it that is incontinent in the unqualified
sense? No one has all the forms of incontinence, but we say some people
are incontinent without qualification. 

3 

Of some such kind are the difficulties that arise; some of these points
must be refuted and the others left in possession of the field; for
the solution of the difficulty is the discovery of the truth. (1)
We must consider first, then, whether incontinent people act knowingly
or not, and in what sense knowingly; then (2) with what sorts of object
the incontinent and the continent man may be said to be concerned
(i.e. whether with any and every pleasure and pain or with certain
determinate kinds), and whether the continent man and the man of endurance
are the same or different; and similarly with regard to the other
matters germane to this inquiry. The starting-point of our investigation
is (a) the question whether the continent man and the incontinent
are differentiated by their objects or by their attitude, i.e. whether
the incontinent man is incontinent simply by being concerned with
such and such objects, or, instead, by his attitude, or, instead of
that, by both these things; (b) the second question is whether incontinence
and continence are concerned with any and every object or not. The
man who is incontinent in the unqualified sense is neither concerned
with any and every object, but with precisely those with which the
self-indulgent man is concerned, nor is he characterized by being
simply related to these (for then his state would be the same as self-indulgence),
but by being related to them in a certain way. For the one is led
on in accordance with his own choice, thinking that he ought always
to pursue the present pleasure; while the other does not think so,
but yet pursues it. 

(1) As for the suggestion that it is true opinion and not knowledge
against which we act incontinently, that makes no difference to the
argument; for some people when in a state of opinion do not hesitate,
but think they know exactly. If, then, the notion is that owing to
their weak conviction those who have opinion are more likely to act
against their judgement than those who know, we answer that there
need be no difference between knowledge and opinion in this respect;
for some men are no less convinced of what they think than others
of what they know; as is shown by the of Heraclitus. But (a), since
we use the word 'know' in two senses (for both the man who has knowledge
but is not using it and he who is using it are said to know), it will
make a difference whether, when a man does what he should not, he
has the knowledge but is not exercising it, or is exercising it; for
the latter seems strange, but not the former. 

(b) Further, since there are two kinds of premisses, there is nothing
to prevent a man's having both premisses and acting against his knowledge,
provided that he is using only the universal premiss and not the particular;
for it is particular acts that have to be done. And there are also
two kinds of universal term; one is predicable of the agent, the other
of the object; e.g. 'dry food is good for every man', and 'I am a
man', or 'such and such food is dry'; but whether 'this food is such
and such', of this the incontinent man either has not or is not exercising
the knowledge. There will, then, be, firstly, an enormous difference
between these manners of knowing, so that to know in one way when
we act incontinently would not seem anything strange, while to know
in the other way would be extraordinary. 

And further (c) the possession of knowledge in another sense than
those just named is something that happens to men; for within the
case of having knowledge but not using it we see a difference of state,
admitting of the possibility of having knowledge in a sense and yet
not having it, as in the instance of a man asleep, mad, or drunk.
But now this is just the condition of men under the influence of passions;
for outbursts of anger and sexual appetites and some other such passions,
it is evident, actually alter our bodily condition, and in some men
even produce fits of madness. It is plain, then, that incontinent
people must be said to be in a similar condition to men asleep, mad,
or drunk. The fact that men use the language that flows from knowledge
proves nothing; for even men under the influence of these passions
utter scientific proofs and verses of Empedocles, and those who have
just begun to learn a science can string together its phrases, but
do not yet know it; for it has to become part of themselves, and that
takes time; so that we must suppose that the use of language by men
in an incontinent state means no more than its utterance by actors
on the stage. (d) Again, we may also view the cause as follows with
reference to the facts of human nature. The one opinion is universal,
the other is concerned with the particular facts, and here we come
to something within the sphere of perception; when a single opinion
results from the two, the soul must in one type of case affirm the
conclusion, while in the case of opinions concerned with production
it must immediately act (e.g. if 'everything sweet ought to be tasted',
and 'this is sweet', in the sense of being one of the particular sweet
things, the man who can act and is not prevented must at the same
time actually act accordingly). When, then, the universal opinion
is present in us forbidding us to taste, and there is also the opinion
that 'everything sweet is pleasant', and that 'this is sweet' (now
this is the opinion that is active), and when appetite happens to
be present in us, the one opinion bids us avoid the object, but appetite
leads us towards it (for it can move each of our bodily parts); so
that it turns out that a man behaves incontinently under the influence
(in a sense) of a rule and an opinion, and of one not contrary in
itself, but only incidentally-for the appetite is contrary, not the
opinion-to the right rule. It also follows that this is the reason
why the lower animals are not incontinent, viz. because they have
no universal judgement but only imagination and memory of particulars.

The explanation of how the ignorance is dissolved and the incontinent
man regains his knowledge, is the same as in the case of the man drunk
or asleep and is not peculiar to this condition; we must go to the
students of natural science for it. Now, the last premiss both being
an opinion about a perceptible object, and being what determines our
actions this a man either has not when he is in the state of passion,
or has it in the sense in which having knowledge did not mean knowing
but only talking, as a drunken man may utter the verses of Empedocles.
And because the last term is not universal nor equally an object of
scientific knowledge with the universal term, the position that Socrates
sought to establish actually seems to result; for it is not in the
presence of what is thought to be knowledge proper that the affection
of incontinence arises (nor is it this that is 'dragged about' as
a result of the state of passion), but in that of perceptual knowledge.

This must suffice as our answer to the question of action with and
without knowledge, and how it is possible to behave incontinently
with knowledge. 

4 

(2) We must next discuss whether there is any one who is incontinent
without qualification, or all men who are incontinent are so in a
particular sense, and if there is, with what sort of objects he is
concerned. That both continent persons and persons of endurance, and
incontinent and soft persons, are concerned with pleasures and pains,
is evident. 

Now of the things that produce pleasure some are necessary, while
others are worthy of choice in themselves but admit of excess, the
bodily causes of pleasure being necessary (by such I mean both those
concerned with food and those concerned with sexual intercourse, i.e.
the bodily matters with which we defined self-indulgence and temperance
as being concerned), while the others are not necessary but worthy
of choice in themselves (e.g. victory, honour, wealth, and good and
pleasant things of this sort). This being so, (a) those who go to
excess with reference to the latter, contrary to the right rule which
is in themselves, are not called incontinent simply, but incontinent
with the qualification 'in respect of money, gain, honour, or anger',-not
simply incontinent, on the ground that they are different from incontinent
people and are called incontinent by reason of a resemblance. (Compare
the case of Anthropos (Man), who won a contest at the Olympic games;
in his case the general definition of man differed little from the
definition peculiar to him, but yet it was different.) This is shown
by the fact that incontinence either without qualification or in respect
of some particular bodily pleasure is blamed not only as a fault but
as a kind of vice, while none of the people who are incontinent in
these other respects is so blamed. 

But (b) of the people who are incontinent with respect to bodily enjoyments,
with which we say the temperate and the self-indulgent man are concerned,
he who pursues the excesses of things pleasant-and shuns those of
things painful, of hunger and thirst and heat and cold and all the
objects of touch and taste-not by choice but contrary to his choice
and his judgement, is called incontinent, not with the qualification
'in respect of this or that', e.g. of anger, but just simply. This
is confirmed by the fact that men are called 'soft' with regard to
these pleasures, but not with regard to any of the others. And for
this reason we group together the incontinent and the self-indulgent,
the continent and the temperate man-but not any of these other types-because
they are concerned somehow with the same pleasures and pains; but
though these are concerned with the same objects, they are not similarly
related to them, but some of them make a deliberate choice while the
others do not. 

This is why we should describe as self-indulgent rather the man who
without appetite or with but a slight appetite pursues the excesses
of pleasure and avoids moderate pains, than the man who does so because
of his strong appetites; for what would the former do, if he had in
addition a vigorous appetite, and a violent pain at the lack of the
'necessary' objects? 

Now of appetites and pleasures some belong to the class of things
generically noble and good-for some pleasant things are by nature
worthy of choice, while others are contrary to these, and others are
intermediate, to adopt our previous distinction-e.g. wealth, gain,
victory, honour. And with reference to all objects whether of this
or of the intermediate kind men are not blamed for being affected
by them, for desiring and loving them, but for doing so in a certain
way, i.e. for going to excess. (This is why all those who contrary
to the rule either are mastered by or pursue one of the objects which
are naturally noble and good, e.g. those who busy themselves more
than they ought about honour or about children and parents, (are not
wicked); for these too are good, and those who busy themselves about
them are praised; but yet there is an excess even in them-if like
Niobe one were to fight even against the gods, or were to be as much
devoted to one's father as Satyrus nicknamed 'the filial', who was
thought to be very silly on this point.) There is no wickedness, then,
with regard to these objects, for the reason named, viz. because each
of them is by nature a thing worthy of choice for its own sake; yet
excesses in respect of them are bad and to be avoided. Similarly there
is no incontinence with regard to them; for incontinence is not only
to be avoided but is also a thing worthy of blame; but owing to a
similarity in the state of feeling people apply the name incontinence,
adding in each case what it is in respect of, as we may describe as
a bad doctor or a bad actor one whom we should not call bad, simply.
As, then, in this case we do not apply the term without qualification
because each of these conditions is no shadness but only analogous
to it, so it is clear that in the other case also that alone must
be taken to be incontinence and continence which is concerned with
the same objects as temperance and self-indulgence, but we apply the
term to anger by virtue of a resemblance; and this is why we say with
a qualification 'incontinent in respect of anger' as we say 'incontinent
in respect of honour, or of gain'. 

5 

(1) Some things are pleasant by nature, and of these (a) some are
so without qualification, and (b) others are so with reference to
particular classes either of animals or of men; while (2) others are
not pleasant by nature, but (a) some of them become so by reason of
injuries to the system, and (b) others by reason of acquired habits,
and (c) others by reason of originally bad natures. This being so,
it is possible with regard to each of the latter kinds to discover
similar states of character to those recognized with regard to the
former; I mean (A) the brutish states, as in the case of the female
who, they say, rips open pregnant women and devours the infants, or
of the things in which some of the tribes about the Black Sea that
have gone savage are said to delight-in raw meat or in human flesh,
or in lending their children to one another to feast upon-or of the
story told of Phalaris. 

These states are brutish, but (B) others arise as a result of disease
(or, in some cases, of madness, as with the man who sacrificed and
ate his mother, or with the slave who ate the liver of his fellow),
and others are morbid states (C) resulting from custom, e.g. the habit
of plucking out the hair or of gnawing the nails, or even coals or
earth, and in addition to these paederasty; for these arise in some
by nature and in others, as in those who have been the victims of
lust from childhood, from habit. 

Now those in whom nature is the cause of such a state no one would
call incontinent, any more than one would apply the epithet to women
because of the passive part they play in copulation; nor would one
apply it to those who are in a morbid condition as a result of habit.
To have these various types of habit is beyond the limits of vice,
as brutishness is too; for a man who has them to master or be mastered
by them is not simple (continence or) incontinence but that which
is so by analogy, as the man who is in this condition in respect of
fits of anger is to be called incontinent in respect of that feeling
but not incontinent simply. For every excessive state whether of folly,
of cowardice, of self-indulgence, or of bad temper, is either brutish
or morbid; the man who is by nature apt to fear everything, even the
squeak of a mouse, is cowardly with a brutish cowardice, while the
man who feared a weasel did so in consequence of disease; and of foolish
people those who by nature are thoughtless and live by their senses
alone are brutish, like some races of the distant barbarians, while
those who are so as a result of disease (e.g. of epilepsy) or of madness
are morbid. Of these characteristics it is possible to have some only
at times, and not to be mastered by them. e.g. Phalaris may have restrained
a desire to eat the flesh of a child or an appetite for unnatural
sexual pleasure; but it is also possible to be mastered, not merely
to have the feelings. Thus, as the wickedness which is on the human
level is called wickedness simply, while that which is not is called
wickedness not simply but with the qualification 'brutish' or 'morbid',
in the same way it is plain that some incontinence is brutish and
some morbid, while only that which corresponds to human self-indulgence
is incontinence simply. 

That incontinence and continence, then, are concerned only with the
same objects as selfindulgence and temperance and that what is concerned
with other objects is a type distinct from incontinence, and called
incontinence by a metaphor and not simply, is plain. 

6 

That incontinence in respect of anger is less disgraceful than that
in respect of the appetites is what we will now proceed to see. (1)
Anger seems to listen to argument to some extent, but to mishear it,
as do hasty servants who run out before they have heard the whole
of what one says, and then muddle the order, or as dogs bark if there
is but a knock at the door, before looking to see if it is a friend;
so anger by reason of the warmth and hastiness of its nature, though
it hears, does not hear an order, and springs to take revenge. For
argument or imagination informs us that we have been insulted or slighted,
and anger, reasoning as it were that anything like this must be fought
against, boils up straightway; while appetite, if argument or perception
merely says that an object is pleasant, springs to the enjoyment of
it. Therefore anger obeys the argument in a sense, but appetite does
not. It is therefore more disgraceful; for the man who is incontinent
in respect of anger is in a sense conquered by argument, while the
other is conquered by appetite and not by argument. 

(2) Further, we pardon people more easily for following natural desires,
since we pardon them more easily for following such appetites as are
common to all men, and in so far as they are common; now anger and
bad temper are more natural than the appetites for excess, i.e. for
unnecessary objects. Take for instance the man who defended himself
on the charge of striking his father by saying 'yes, but he struck
his father, and he struck his, and' (pointing to his child) 'this
boy will strike me when he is a man; it runs in the family'; or the
man who when he was being dragged along by his son bade him stop at
the doorway, since he himself had dragged his father only as far as
that. 

(2) Further, those who are more given to plotting against others are
more criminal. Now a passionate man is not given to plotting, nor
is anger itself-it is open; but the nature of appetite is illustrated
by what the poets call Aphrodite, 'guile-weaving daughter of Cyprus',
and by Homer's words about her 'embroidered girdle': 

And the whisper of wooing is there, 
Whose subtlety stealeth the wits of the wise, how prudent soe'er.
Therefore if this form of incontinence is more criminal and disgraceful
than that in respect of anger, it is both incontinence without qualification
and in a sense vice. 

(4) Further, no one commits wanton outrage with a feeling of pain,
but every one who acts in anger acts with pain, while the man who
commits outrage acts with pleasure. If, then, those acts at which
it is most just to be angry are more criminal than others, the incontinence
which is due to appetite is the more criminal; for there is no wanton
outrage involved in anger. 

Plainly, then, the incontinence concerned with appetite is more disgraceful
than that concerned with anger, and continence and incontinence are
concerned with bodily appetites and pleasures; but we must grasp the
differences among the latter themselves. For, as has been said at
the beginning, some are human and natural both in kind and in magnitude,
others are brutish, and others are due to organic injuries and diseases.
Only with the first of these are temperance and self-indulgence concerned;
this is why we call the lower animals neither temperate nor self-indulgent
except by a metaphor, and only if some one race of animals exceeds
another as a whole in wantonness, destructiveness, and omnivorous
greed; these have no power of choice or calculation, but they are
departures from the natural norm, as, among men, madmen are. Now brutishness
is a less evil than vice, though more alarming; for it is not that
the better part has been perverted, as in man,-they have no better
part. Thus it is like comparing a lifeless thing with a living in
respect of badness; for the badness of that which has no originative
source of movement is always less hurtful, and reason is an originative
source. Thus it is like comparing injustice in the abstract with an
unjust man. Each is in some sense worse; for a bad man will do ten
thousand times as much evil as a brute. 

7 

With regard to the pleasures and pains and appetites and aversions
arising through touch and taste, to which both self-indulgence and
temperance were formerly narrowed down, it possible to be in such
a state as to be defeated even by those of them which most people
master, or to master even those by which most people are defeated;
among these possibilities, those relating to pleasures are incontinence
and continence, those relating to pains softness and endurance. The
state of most people is intermediate, even if they lean more towards
the worse states. 

Now, since some pleasures are necessary while others are not, and
are necessary up to a point while the excesses of them are not, nor
the deficiencies, and this is equally true of appetites and pains,
the man who pursues the excesses of things pleasant, or pursues to
excess necessary objects, and does so by choice, for their own sake
and not at all for the sake of any result distinct from them, is self-indulgent;
for such a man is of necessity unlikely to repent, and therefore incurable,
since a man who cannot repent cannot be cured. The man who is deficient
in his pursuit of them is the opposite of self-indulgent; the man
who is intermediate is temperate. Similarly, there is the man who
avoids bodily pains not because he is defeated by them but by choice.
(Of those who do not choose such acts, one kind of man is led to them
as a result of the pleasure involved, another because he avoids the
pain arising from the appetite, so that these types differ from one
another. Now any one would think worse of a man with no appetite or
with weak appetite were he to do something disgraceful, than if he
did it under the influence of powerful appetite, and worse of him
if he struck a blow not in anger than if he did it in anger; for what
would he have done if he had been strongly affected? This is why the
self-indulgent man is worse than the incontinent.) of the states named,
then, the latter is rather a kind of softness; the former is self-indulgence.
While to the incontinent man is opposed the continent, to the soft
is opposed the man of endurance; for endurance consists in resisting,
while continence consists in conquering, and resisting and conquering
are different, as not being beaten is different from winning; this
is why continence is also more worthy of choice than endurance. Now
the man who is defective in respect of resistance to the things which
most men both resist and resist successfully is soft and effeminate;
for effeminacy too is a kind of softness; such a man trails his cloak
to avoid the pain of lifting it, and plays the invalid without thinking
himself wretched, though the man he imitates is a wretched man.

The case is similar with regard to continence and incontinence. For
if a man is defeated by violent and excessive pleasures or pains,
there is nothing wonderful in that; indeed we are ready to pardon
him if he has resisted, as Theodectes' Philoctetes does when bitten
by the snake, or Carcinus' Cercyon in the Alope, and as people who
try to restrain their laughter burst out into a guffaw, as happened
to Xenophantus. But it is surprising if a man is defeated by and cannot
resist pleasures or pains which most men can hold out against, when
this is not due to heredity or disease, like the softness that is
hereditary with the kings of the Scythians, or that which distinguishes
the female sex from the male. 

The lover of amusement, too, is thought to be self-indulgent, but
is really soft. For amusement is a relaxation, since it is a rest
from work; and the lover of amusement is one of the people who go
to excess in this. 

Of incontinence one kind is impetuosity, another weakness. For some
men after deliberating fail, owing to their emotion, to stand by the
conclusions of their deliberation, others because they have not deliberated
are led by their emotion; since some men (just as people who first
tickle others are not tickled themselves), if they have first perceived
and seen what is coming and have first roused themselves and their
calculative faculty, are not defeated by their emotion, whether it
be pleasant or painful. It is keen and excitable people that suffer
especially from the impetuous form of incontinence; for the former
by reason of their quickness and the latter by reason of the violence
of their passions do not await the argument, because they are apt
to follow their imagination. 

8 

The self-indulgent man, as was said, is not apt to repent; for he
stands by his choice; but incontinent man is likely to repent. This
is why the position is not as it was expressed in the formulation
of the problem, but the selfindulgent man is incurable and the incontinent
man curable; for wickedness is like a disease such as dropsy or consumption,
while incontinence is like epilepsy; the former is a permanent, the
latter an intermittent badness. And generally incontinence and vice
are different in kind; vice is unconscious of itself, incontinence
is not (of incontinent men themselves, those who become temporarily
beside themselves are better than those who have the rational principle
but do not abide by it, since the latter are defeated by a weaker
passion, and do not act without previous deliberation like the others);
for the incontinent man is like the people who get drunk quickly and
on little wine, i.e. on less than most people. 

Evidently, then, incontinence is not vice (though perhaps it is so
in a qualified sense); for incontinence is contrary to choice while
vice is in accordance with choice; not but what they are similar in
respect of the actions they lead to; as in the saying of Demodocus
about the Milesians, 'the Milesians are not without sense, but they
do the things that senseless people do', so too incontinent people
are not criminal, but they will do criminal acts. 

Now, since the incontinent man is apt to pursue, not on conviction,
bodily pleasures that are excessive and contrary to the right rule,
while the self-indulgent man is convinced because he is the sort of
man to pursue them, it is on the contrary the former that is easily
persuaded to change his mind, while the latter is not. For virtue
and vice respectively preserve and destroy the first principle, and
in actions the final cause is the first principle, as the hypotheses
are in mathematics; neither in that case is it argument that teaches
the first principles, nor is it so here-virtue either natural or produced
by habituation is what teaches right opinion about the first principle.
Such a man as this, then, is temperate; his contrary is the self-indulgent.

But there is a sort of man who is carried away as a result of passion
and contrary to the right rule-a man whom passion masters so that
he does not act according to the right rule, but does not master to
the extent of making him ready to believe that he ought to pursue
such pleasures without reserve; this is the incontinent man, who is
better than the self-indulgent man, and not bad without qualification;
for the best thing in him, the first principle, is preserved. And
contrary to him is another kind of man, he who abides by his convictions
and is not carried away, at least as a result of passion. It is evident
from these considerations that the latter is a good state and the
former a bad one. 

9 

Is the man continent who abides by any and every rule and any and
every choice, or the man who abides by the right choice, and is he
incontinent who abandons any and every choice and any and every rule,
or he who abandons the rule that is not false and the choice that
is right; this is how we put it before in our statement of the problem.
Or is it incidentally any and every choice but per se the true rule
and the right choice by which the one abides and the other does not?
If any one chooses or pursues this for the sake of that, per se he
pursues and chooses the latter, but incidentally the former. But when
we speak without qualification we mean what is per se. Therefore in
a sense the one abides by, and the other abandons, any and every opinion;
but without qualification, the true opinion. 

There are some who are apt to abide by their opinion, who are called
strong-headed, viz. those who are hard to persuade in the first instance
and are not easily persuaded to change; these have in them something
like the continent man, as the prodigal is in a way like the liberal
man and the rash man like the confident man; but they are different
in many respects. For it is to passion and appetite that the one will
not yield, since on occasion the continent man will be easy to persuade;
but it is to argument that the others refuse to yield, for they do
form appetites and many of them are led by their pleasures. Now the
people who are strong-headed are the opinionated, the ignorant, and
the boorish-the opinionated being influenced by pleasure and pain;
for they delight in the victory they gain if they are not persuaded
to change, and are pained if their decisions become null and void
as decrees sometimes do; so that they are liker the incontinent than
the continent man. 

But there are some who fail to abide by their resolutions, not as
a result of incontinence, e.g. Neoptolemus in Sophocles' Philoctetes;
yet it was for the sake of pleasure that he did not stand fast-but
a noble pleasure; for telling the truth was noble to him, but he had
been persuaded by Odysseus to tell the lie. For not every one who
does anything for the sake of pleasure is either self-indulgent or
bad or incontinent, but he who does it for a disgraceful pleasure.

Since there is also a sort of man who takes less delight than he should
in bodily things, and does not abide by the rule, he who is intermediate
between him and the incontinent man is the continent man; for the
incontinent man fails to abide by the rule because he delights too
much in them, and this man because he delights in them too little;
while the continent man abides by the rule and does not change on
either account. Now if continence is good, both the contrary states
must be bad, as they actually appear to be; but because the other
extreme is seen in few people and seldom, as temperance is thought
to be contrary only to self-indulgence, so is continence to incontinence.

Since many names are applied analogically, it is by analogy that we
have come to speak of the 'continence' the temperate man; for both
the continent man and the temperate man are such as to do nothing
contrary to the rule for the sake of the bodily pleasures, but the
former has and the latter has not bad appetites, and the latter is
such as not to feel pleasure contrary to the rule, while the former
is such as to feel pleasure but not to be led by it. And the incontinent
and the self-indulgent man are also like another; they are different,
but both pursue bodily pleasures- the latter, however, also thinking
that he ought to do so, while the former does not think this.

10 

Nor can the same man have practical wisdom and be incontinent; for
it has been shown' that a man is at the same time practically wise,
and good in respect of character. Further, a man has practical wisdom
not by knowing only but by being able to act; but the incontinent
man is unable to act-there is, however, nothing to prevent a clever
man from being incontinent; this is why it is sometimes actually thought
that some people have practical wisdom but are incontinent, viz. because
cleverness and practical wisdom differ in the way we have described
in our first discussions, and are near together in respect of their
reasoning, but differ in respect of their purpose-nor yet is the incontinent
man like the man who knows and is contemplating a truth, but like
the man who is asleep or drunk. And he acts willingly (for he acts
in a sense with knowledge both of what he does and of the end to which
he does it), but is not wicked, since his purpose is good; so that
he is half-wicked. And he is not a criminal; for he does not act of
malice aforethought; of the two types of incontinent man the one does
not abide by the conclusions of his deliberation, while the excitable
man does not deliberate at all. And thus the incontinent man like
a city which passes all the right decrees and has good laws, but makes
no use of them, as in Anaxandrides' jesting remark, 

The city willed it, that cares nought for laws; but the wicked man
is like a city that uses its laws, but has wicked laws to use.

Now incontinence and continence are concerned with that which is in
excess of the state characteristic of most men; for the continent
man abides by his resolutions more and the incontinent man less than
most men can. 

Of the forms of incontinence, that of excitable people is more curable
than that of those who deliberate but do not abide by their decisions,
and those who are incontinent through habituation are more curable
than those in whom incontinence is innate; for it is easier to change
a habit than to change one's nature; even habit is hard to change
just because it is like nature, as Evenus says: 

I say that habit's but a long practice, friend, 
And this becomes men's nature in the end. 

We have now stated what continence, incontinence, endurance, and softness
are, and how these states are related to each other. 

11 

The study of pleasure and pain belongs to the province of the political
philosopher; for he is the architect of the end, with a view to which
we call one thing bad and another good without qualification. Further,
it is one of our necessary tasks to consider them; for not only did
we lay it down that moral virtue and vice are concerned with pains
and pleasures, but most people say that happiness involves pleasure;
this is why the blessed man is called by a name derived from a word
meaning enjoyment. 

Now (1) some people think that no pleasure is a good, either in itself
or incidentally, since the good and pleasure are not the same; (2)
others think that some pleasures are good but that most are bad. (3)
Again there is a third view, that even if all pleasures are good,
yet the best thing in the world cannot be pleasure. (1) The reasons
given for the view that pleasure is not a good at all are (a) that
every pleasure is a perceptible process to a natural state, and that
no process is of the same kind as its end, e.g. no process of building
of the same kind as a house. (b) A temperate man avoids pleasures.
(c) A man of practical wisdom pursues what is free from pain, not
what is pleasant. (d) The pleasures are a hindrance to thought, and
the more so the more one delights in them, e.g. in sexual pleasure;
for no one could think of anything while absorbed in this. (e) There
is no art of pleasure; but every good is the product of some art.
(f) Children and the brutes pursue pleasures. (2) The reasons for
the view that not all pleasures are good are that (a) there are pleasures
that are actually base and objects of reproach, and (b) there are
harmful pleasures; for some pleasant things are unhealthy. (3) The
reason for the view that the best thing in the world is not pleasure
is that pleasure is not an end but a process. 

12 

These are pretty much the things that are said. That it does not follow
from these grounds that pleasure is not a good, or even the chief
good, is plain from the following considerations. (A, a) First, since
that which is good may be so in either of two senses (one thing good
simply and another good for a particular person), natural constitutions
and states of being, and therefore also the corresponding movements
and processes, will be correspondingly divisible. Of those which are
thought to be bad some will be bad if taken without qualification
but not bad for a particular person, but worthy of his choice, and
some will not be worthy of choice even for a particular person, but
only at a particular time and for a short period, though not without
qualification; while others are not even pleasures, but seem to be
so, viz. all those which involve pain and whose end is curative, e.g.
the processes that go on in sick persons. 

(b) Further, one kind of good being activity and another being state,
the processes that restore us to our natural state are only incidentally
pleasant; for that matter the activity at work in the appetites for
them is the activity of so much of our state and nature as has remained
unimpaired; for there are actually pleasures that involve no pain
or appetite (e.g. those of contemplation), the nature in such a case
not being defective at all. That the others are incidental is indicated
by the fact that men do not enjoy the same pleasant objects when their
nature is in its settled state as they do when it is being replenished,
but in the former case they enjoy the things that are pleasant without
qualification, in the latter the contraries of these as well; for
then they enjoy even sharp and bitter things, none of which is pleasant
either by nature or without qualification. The states they produce,
therefore, are not pleasures naturally or without qualification; for
as pleasant things differ, so do the pleasures arising from them.

(c) Again, it is not necessary that there should be something else
better than pleasure, as some say the end is better than the process;
for leasures are not processes nor do they all involve process-they
are activities and ends; nor do they arise when we are becoming something,
but when we are exercising some faculty; and not all pleasures have
an end different from themselves, but only the pleasures of persons
who are being led to the perfecting of their nature. This is why it
is not right to say that pleasure is perceptible process, but it should
rather be called activity of the natural state, and instead of 'perceptible'
'unimpeded'. It is thought by some people to be process just because
they think it is in the strict sense good; for they think that activity
is process, which it is not. 

(B) The view that pleasures are bad because some pleasant things are
unhealthy is like saying that healthy things are bad because some
healthy things are bad for money-making; both are bad in the respect
mentioned, but they are not bad for that reason-indeed, thinking itself
is sometimes injurious to health. 

Neither practical wisdom nor any state of being is impeded by the
pleasure arising from it; it is foreign pleasures that impede, for
the pleasures arising from thinking and learning will make us think
and learn all the more. 

(C) The fact that no pleasure is the product of any art arises naturally
enough; there is no art of any other activity either, but only of
the corresponding faculty; though for that matter the arts of the
perfumer and the cook are thought to be arts of pleasure.

(D) The arguments based on the grounds that the temperate man avoids
pleasure and that the man of practical wisdom pursues the painless
life, and that children and the brutes pursue pleasure, are all refuted
by the same consideration. We have pointed out in what sense pleasures
are good without qualification and in what sense some are not good;
now both the brutes and children pursue pleasures of the latter kind
(and the man of practical wisdom pursues tranquil freedom from that
kind), viz. those which imply appetite and pain, i.e. the bodily pleasures
(for it is these that are of this nature) and the excesses of them,
in respect of which the self-indulgent man is self-indulent. This
is why the temperate man avoids these pleasures; for even he has pleasures
of his own. 

13 

But further (E) it is agreed that pain is bad and to be avoided; for
some pain is without qualification bad, and other pain is bad because
it is in some respect an impediment to us. Now the contrary of that
which is to be avoided, qua something to be avoided and bad, is good.
Pleasure, then, is necessarily a good. For the answer of Speusippus,
that pleasure is contrary both to pain and to good, as the greater
is contrary both to the less and to the equal, is not successful;
since he would not say that pleasure is essentially just a species
of evil. 

And (F) if certain pleasures are bad, that does not prevent the chief
good from being some pleasure, just as the chief good may be some
form of knowledge though certain kinds of knowledge are bad. Perhaps
it is even necessary, if each disposition has unimpeded activities,
that, whether the activity (if unimpeded) of all our dispositions
or that of some one of them is happiness, this should be the thing
most worthy of our choice; and this activity is pleasure. Thus the
chief good would be some pleasure, though most pleasures might perhaps
be bad without qualification. And for this reason all men think that
the happy life is pleasant and weave pleasure into their ideal of
happiness-and reasonably too; for no activity is perfect when it is
impeded, and happiness is a perfect thing; this is why the happy man
needs the goods of the body and external goods, i.e. those of fortune,
viz. in order that he may not be impeded in these ways. Those who
say that the victim on the rack or the man who falls into great misfortunes
is happy if he is good, are, whether they mean to or not, talking
nonsense. Now because we need fortune as well as other things, some
people think good fortune the same thing as happiness; but it is not
that, for even good fortune itself when in excess is an impediment,
and perhaps should then be no longer called good fortune; for its
limit is fixed by reference to happiness. 

And indeed the fact that all things, both brutes and men, pursue pleasure
is an indication of its being somehow the chief good: 

No voice is wholly lost that many peoples... But since no one nature
or state either is or is thought the best for all, neither do all
pursue the same pleasure; yet all pursue pleasure. And perhaps they
actually pursue not the pleasure they think they pursue nor that which
they would say they pursue, but the same pleasure; for all things
have by nature something divine in them. But the bodily pleasures
have appropriated the name both because we oftenest steer our course
for them and because all men share in them; thus because they alone
are familiar, men think there are no others. 

It is evident also that if pleasure, i.e. the activity of our faculties,
is not a good, it will not be the case that the happy man lives a
pleasant life; for to what end should he need pleasure, if it is not
a good but the happy man may even live a painful life? For pain is
neither an evil nor a good, if pleasure is not; why then should he
avoid it? Therefore, too, the life of the good man will not be pleasanter
than that of any one else, if his activities are not more pleasant.

14 

(G) With regard to the bodily pleasures, those who say that some pleasures
are very much to be chosen, viz. the noble pleasures, but not the
bodily pleasures, i.e. those with which the self-indulgent man is
concerned, must consider why, then, the contrary pains are bad. For
the contrary of bad is good. Are the necessary pleasures good in the
sense in which even that which is not bad is good? Or are they good
up to a point? Is it that where you have states and processes of which
there cannot be too much, there cannot be too much of the corresponding
pleasure, and that where there can be too much of the one there can
be too much of the other also? Now there can be too much of bodily
goods, and the bad man is bad by virtue of pursuing the excess, not
by virtue of pursuing the necessary pleasures (for all men enjoy in
some way or other both dainty foods and wines and sexual intercourse,
but not all men do so as they ought). The contrary is the case with
pain; for he does not avoid the excess of it, he avoids it altogether;
and this is peculiar to him, for the alternative to excess of pleasure
is not pain, except to the man who pursues this excess. 

Since we should state not only the truth, but also the cause of error-for
this contributes towards producing conviction, since when a reasonable
explanation is given of why the false view appears true, this tends
to produce belief in the true view-therefore we must state why the
bodily pleasures appear the more worthy of choice. (a) Firstly, then,
it is because they expel pain; owing to the excesses of pain that
men experience, they pursue excessive and in general bodily pleasure
as being a cure for the pain. Now curative agencies produce intense
feeling-which is the reason why they are pursued-because they show
up against the contrary pain. (Indeed pleasure is thought not to be
good for these two reasons, as has been said, viz. that (a) some of
them are activities belonging to a bad nature-either congenital, as
in the case of a brute, or due to habit, i.e. those of bad men; while
(b) others are meant to cure a defective nature, and it is better
to be in a healthy state than to be getting into it, but these arise
during the process of being made perfect and are therefore only incidentally
good., b) Further, they are pursued because of their violence by
those who cannot enjoy other pleasures. (At all events they go out
of their way to manufacture thirsts somehow for themselves. When these
are harmless, the practice is irreproachable; when they are hurtful,
it is bad.) For they have nothing else to enjoy, and, besides, a neutral
state is painful to many people because of their nature. For the animal
nature is always in travail, as the students of natural science also
testify, saying that sight and hearing are painful; but we have become
used to this, as they maintain. Similarly, while, in youth, people
are, owing to the growth that is going on, in a situation like that
of drunken men, and youth is pleasant, on the other hand people of
excitable nature always need relief; for even their body is ever in
torment owing to its special composition, and they are always under
the influence of violent desire; but pain is driven out both by the
contrary pleasure, and by any chance pleasure if it be strong; and
for these reasons they become self-indulgent and bad. But the pleasures
that do not involve pains do not admit of excess; and these are among
the things pleasant by nature and not incidentally. By things pleasant
incidentally I mean those that act as cures (for because as a result
people are cured, through some action of the part that remains healthy,
for this reason the process is thought pleasant); by things naturally
pleasant I mean those that stimulate the action of the healthy nature.

There is no one thing that is always pleasant, because our nature
is not simple but there is another element in us as well, inasmuch
as we are perishable creatures, so that if the one element does something,
this is unnatural to the other nature, and when the two elements are
evenly balanced, what is done seems neither painful nor pleasant;
for if the nature of anything were simple, the same action would always
be most pleasant to it. This is why God always enjoys a single and
simple pleasure; for there is not only an activity of movement but
an activity of immobility, and pleasure is found more in rest than
in movement. But 'change in all things is sweet', as the poet says,
because of some vice; for as it is the vicious man that is changeable,
so the nature that needs change is vicious; for it is not simple nor
good. 

We have now discussed continence and incontinence, and pleasure and
pain, both what each is and in what sense some of them are good and
others bad; it remains to speak of friendship. 



BOOK VIII

1 

After what we have said, a discussion of friendship would naturally
follow, since it is a virtue or implies virtue, and is besides most
necessary with a view to living. For without friends no one would
choose to live, though he had all other goods; even rich men and those
in possession of office and of dominating power are thought to need
friends most of all; for what is the use of such prosperity without
the opportunity of beneficence, which is exercised chiefly and in
its most laudable form towards friends? Or how can prosperity be guarded
and preserved without friends? The greater it is, the more exposed
is it to risk. And in poverty and in other misfortunes men think friends
are the only refuge. It helps the young, too, to keep from error;
it aids older people by ministering to their needs and supplementing
the activities that are failing from weakness; those in the prime
of life it stimulates to noble actions-'two going together'-for with
friends men are more able both to think and to act. Again, parent
seems by nature to feel it for offspring and offspring for parent,
not only among men but among birds and among most animals; it is felt
mutually by members of the same race, and especially by men, whence
we praise lovers of their fellowmen. We may even in our travels how
near and dear every man is to every other. Friendship seems too to
hold states together, and lawgivers to care more for it than for justice;
for unanimity seems to be something like friendship, and this they
aim at most of all, and expel faction as their worst enemy; and when
men are friends they have no need of justice, while when they are
just they need friendship as well, and the truest form of justice
is thought to be a friendly quality. 

But it is not only necessary but also noble; for we praise those who
love their friends, and it is thought to be a fine thing to have many
friends; and again we think it is the same people that are good men
and are friends. 

Not a few things about friendship are matters of debate. Some define
it as a kind of likeness and say like people are friends, whence come
the sayings 'like to like', 'birds of a feather flock together', and
so on; others on the contrary say 'two of a trade never agree'. On
this very question they inquire for deeper and more physical causes,
Euripides saying that 'parched earth loves the rain, and stately heaven
when filled with rain loves to fall to earth', and Heraclitus that
'it is what opposes that helps' and 'from different tones comes the
fairest tune' and 'all things are produced through strife'; while
Empedocles, as well as others, expresses the opposite view that like
aims at like. The physical problems we may leave alone (for they do
not belong to the present inquiry); let us examine those which are
human and involve character and feeling, e.g. whether friendship can
arise between any two people or people cannot be friends if they are
wicked, and whether there is one species of friendship or more than
one. Those who think there is only one because it admits of degrees
have relied on an inadequate indication; for even things different
in species admit of degree. We have discussed this matter previously.

2 

The kinds of friendship may perhaps be cleared up if we first come
to know the object of love. For not everything seems to be loved but
only the lovable, and this is good, pleasant, or useful; but it would
seem to be that by which some good or pleasure is produced that is
useful, so that it is the good and the useful that are lovable as
ends. Do men love, then, the good, or what is good for them? These
sometimes clash. So too with regard to the pleasant. Now it is thought
that each loves what is good for himself, and that the good is without
qualification lovable, and what is good for each man is lovable for
him; but each man loves not what is good for him but what seems good.
This however will make no difference; we shall just have to say that
this is 'that which seems lovable'. Now there are three grounds on
which people love; of the love of lifeless objects we do not use the
word 'friendship'; for it is not mutual love, nor is there a wishing
of good to the other (for it would surely be ridiculous to wish wine
well; if one wishes anything for it, it is that it may keep, so that
one may have it oneself); but to a friend we say we ought to wish
what is good for his sake. But to those who thus wish good we ascribe
only goodwill, if the wish is not reciprocated; goodwill when it is
reciprocal being friendship. Or must we add 'when it is recognized'?
For many people have goodwill to those whom they have not seen but
judge to be good or useful; and one of these might return this feeling.
These people seem to bear goodwill to each other; but how could one
call them friends when they do not know their mutual feelings? To
be friends, then, the must be mutually recognized as bearing goodwill
and wishing well to each other for one of the aforesaid reasons.

3 

Now these reasons differ from each other in kind; so, therefore, do
the corresponding forms of love and friendship. There are therefore
three kinds of friendship, equal in number to the things that are
lovable; for with respect to each there is a mutual and recognized
love, and those who love each other wish well to each other in that
respect in which they love one another. Now those who love each other
for their utility do not love each other for themselves but in virtue
of some good which they get from each other. So too with those who
love for the sake of pleasure; it is not for their character that
men love ready-witted people, but because they find them pleasant.
Therefore those who love for the sake of utility love for the sake
of what is good for themselves, and those who love for the sake of
pleasure do so for the sake of what is pleasant to themselves, and
not in so far as the other is the person loved but in so far as he
is useful or pleasant. And thus these friendships are only incidental;
for it is not as being the man he is that the loved person is loved,
but as providing some good or pleasure. Such friendships, then, are
easily dissolved, if the parties do not remain like themselves; for
if the one party is no longer pleasant or useful the other ceases
to love him. 

Now the useful is not permanent but is always changing. Thus when
the motive of the friendship is done away, the friendship is dissolved,
inasmuch as it existed only for the ends in question. This kind of
friendship seems to exist chiefly between old people (for at that
age people pursue not the pleasant but the useful) and, of those who
are in their prime or young, between those who pursue utility. And
such people do not live much with each other either; for sometimes
they do not even find each other pleasant; therefore they do not need
such companionship unless they are useful to each other; for they
are pleasant to each other only in so far as they rouse in each other
hopes of something good to come. Among such friendships people also
class the friendship of a host and guest. On the other hand the friendship
of young people seems to aim at pleasure; for they live under the
guidance of emotion, and pursue above all what is pleasant to themselves
and what is immediately before them; but with increasing age their
pleasures become different. This is why they quickly become friends
and quickly cease to be so; their friendship changes with the object
that is found pleasant, and such pleasure alters quickly. Young people
are amorous too; for the greater part of the friendship of love depends
on emotion and aims at pleasure; this is why they fall in love and
quickly fall out of love, changing often within a single day. But
these people do wish to spend their days and lives together; for it
is thus that they attain the purpose of their friendship.

Perfect friendship is the friendship of men who are good, and alike
in virtue; for these wish well alike to each other qua good, and they
are good themselves. Now those who wish well to their friends for
their sake are most truly friends; for they do this by reason of own
nature and not incidentally; therefore their friendship lasts as long
as they are good-and goodness is an enduring thing. And each is good
without qualification and to his friend, for the good are both good
without qualification and useful to each other. So too they are pleasant;
for the good are pleasant both without qualification and to each other,
since to each his own activities and others like them are pleasurable,
and the actions of the good are the same or like. And such a friendship
is as might be expected permanent, since there meet in it all the
qualities that friends should have. For all friendship is for the
sake of good or of pleasure-good or pleasure either in the abstract
or such as will be enjoyed by him who has the friendly feeling-and
is based on a certain resemblance; and to a friendship of good men
all the qualities we have named belong in virtue of the nature of
the friends themselves; for in the case of this kind of friendship
the other qualities also are alike in both friends, and that which
is good without qualification is also without qualification pleasant,
and these are the most lovable qualities. Love and friendship therefore
are found most and in their best form between such men. 

But it is natural that such friendships should be infrequent; for
such men are rare. Further, such friendship requires time and familiarity;
as the proverb says, men cannot know each other till they have 'eaten
salt together'; nor can they admit each other to friendship or be
friends till each has been found lovable and been trusted by each.
Those who quickly show the marks of friendship to each other wish
to be friends, but are not friends unless they both are lovable and
know the fact; for a wish for friendship may arise quickly, but friendship
does not. 

4 

This kind of friendship, then, is perfect both in respect of duration
and in all other respects, and in it each gets from each in all respects
the same as, or something like what, he gives; which is what ought
to happen between friends. Friendship for the sake of pleasure bears
a resemblance to this kind; for good people too are pleasant to each
other. So too does friendship for the sake of utility; for the good
are also useful to each other. Among men of these inferior sorts too,
friendships are most permanent when the friends get the same thing
from each other (e.g. pleasure), and not only that but also from the
same source, as happens between readywitted people, not as happens
between lover and beloved. For these do not take pleasure in the same
things, but the one in seeing the beloved and the other in receiving
attentions from his lover; and when the bloom of youth is passing
the friendship sometimes passes too (for the one finds no pleasure
in the sight of the other, and the other gets no attentions from the
first); but many lovers on the other hand are constant, if familiarity
has led them to love each other's characters, these being alike. But
those who exchange not pleasure but utility in their amour are both
less truly friends and less constant. Those who are friends for the
sake of utility part when the advantage is at an end; for they were
lovers not of each other but of profit. 

For the sake of pleasure or utility, then, even bad men may be friends
of each other, or good men of bad, or one who is neither good nor
bad may be a friend to any sort of person, but for their own sake
clearly only good men can be friends; for bad men do not delight in
each other unless some advantage come of the relation. 

The friendship of the good too and this alone is proof against slander;
for it is not easy to trust any one talk about a man who has long
been tested by oneself; and it is among good men that trust and the
feeling that 'he would never wrong me' and all the other things that
are demanded in true friendship are found. In the other kinds of friendship,
however, there is nothing to prevent these evils arising. For men
apply the name of friends even to those whose motive is utility, in
which sense states are said to be friendly (for the alliances of states
seem to aim at advantage), and to those who love each other for the
sake of pleasure, in which sense children are called friends. Therefore
we too ought perhaps to call such people friends, and say that there
are several kinds of friendship-firstly and in the proper sense that
of good men qua good, and by analogy the other kinds; for it is in
virtue of something good and something akin to what is found in true
friendship that they are friends, since even the pleasant is good
for the lovers of pleasure. But these two kinds of friendship are
not often united, nor do the same people become friends for the sake
of utility and of pleasure; for things that are only incidentally
connected are not often coupled together. 

Friendship being divided into these kinds, bad men will be friends
for the sake of pleasure or of utility, being in this respect like
each other, but good men will be friends for their own sake, i.e.
in virtue of their goodness. These, then, are friends without qualification;
the others are friends incidentally and through a resemblance to these.

5 

As in regard to the virtues some men are called good in respect of
a state of character, others in respect of an activity, so too in
the case of friendship; for those who live together delight in each
other and confer benefits on each other, but those who are asleep
or locally separated are not performing, but are disposed to perform,
the activities of friendship; distance does not break off the friendship
absolutely, but only the activity of it. But if the absence is lasting,
it seems actually to make men forget their friendship; hence the saying
'out of sight, out of mind'. Neither old people nor sour people seem
to make friends easily; for there is little that is pleasant in them,
and no one can spend his days with one whose company is painful, or
not pleasant, since nature seems above all to avoid the painful and
to aim at the pleasant. Those, however, who approve of each other
but do not live together seem to be well-disposed rather than actual
friends. For there is nothing so characteristic of friends as living
together (since while it people who are in need that desire benefits,
even those who are supremely happy desire to spend their days together;
for solitude suits such people least of all); but people cannot live
together if they are not pleasant and do not enjoy the same things,
as friends who are companions seem to do. 

The truest friendship, then, is that of the good, as we have frequently
said; for that which is without qualification good or pleasant seems
to be lovable and desirable, and for each person that which is good
or pleasant to him; and the good man is lovable and desirable to the
good man for both these reasons. Now it looks as if love were a feeling,
friendship a state of character; for love may be felt just as much
towards lifeless things, but mutual love involves choice and choice
springs from a state of character; and men wish well to those whom
they love, for their sake, not as a result of feeling but as a result
of a state of character. And in loving a friend men love what is good
for themselves; for the good man in becoming a friend becomes a good
to his friend. Each, then, both loves what is good for himself, and
makes an equal return in goodwill and in pleasantness; for friendship
is said to be equality, and both of these are found most in the friendship
of the good. 

6 

Between sour and elderly people friendship arises less readily, inasmuch
as they are less good-tempered and enjoy companionship less; for these
are thou to be the greatest marks of friendship productive of it.
This is why, while men become friends quickly, old men do not; it
is because men do not become friends with those in whom they do not
delight; and similarly sour people do not quickly make friends either.
But such men may bear goodwill to each other; for they wish one another
well and aid one another in need; but they are hardly friends because
they do not spend their days together nor delight in each other, and
these are thought the greatest marks of friendship. 

One cannot be a friend to many people in the sense of having friendship
of the perfect type with them, just as one cannot be in love with
many people at once (for love is a sort of excess of feeling, and
it is the nature of such only to be felt towards one person); and
it is not easy for many people at the same time to please the same
person very greatly, or perhaps even to be good in his eyes. One must,
too, acquire some experience of the other person and become familiar
with him, and that is very hard. But with a view to utility or pleasure
it is possible that many people should please one; for many people
are useful or pleasant, and these services take little time.

Of these two kinds that which is for the sake of pleasure is the more
like friendship, when both parties get the same things from each other
and delight in each other or in the things, as in the friendships
of the young; for generosity is more found in such friendships. Friendship
based on utility is for the commercially minded. People who are supremely
happy, too, have no need of useful friends, but do need pleasant friends;
for they wish to live with some one and, though they can endure for
a short time what is painful, no one could put up with it continuously,
nor even with the Good itself if it were painful to him; this is why
they look out for friends who are pleasant. Perhaps they should look
out for friends who, being pleasant, are also good, and good for them
too; for so they will have all the characteristics that friends should
have. 

People in positions of authority seem to have friends who fall into
distinct classes; some people are useful to them and others are pleasant,
but the same people are rarely both; for they seek neither those whose
pleasantness is accompanied by virtue nor those whose utility is with
a view to noble objects, but in their desire for pleasure they seek
for ready-witted people, and their other friends they choose as being
clever at doing what they are told, and these characteristics are
rarely combined. Now we have said that the good man is at the same
time pleasant and useful; but such a man does not become the friend
of one who surpasses him in station, unless he is surpassed also in
virtue; if this is not so, he does not establish equality by being
proportionally exceeded in both respects. But people who surpass him
in both respects are not so easy to find. 

However that may be, the aforesaid friendships involve equality; for
the friends get the same things from one another and wish the same
things for one another, or exchange one thing for another, e.g. pleasure
for utility; we have said, however, that they are both less truly
friendships and less permanent. 

But it is from their likeness and their unlikeness to the same thing
that they are thought both to be and not to be friendships. It is
by their likeness to the friendship of virtue that they seem to be
friendships (for one of them involves pleasure and the other utility,
and these characteristics belong to the friendship of virtue as well);
while it is because the friendship of virtue is proof against slander
and permanent, while these quickly change (besides differing from
the former in many other respects), that they appear not to be friendships;
i.e. it is because of their unlikeness to the friendship of virtue.

7 

But there is another kind of friendship, viz. that which involves
an inequality between the parties, e.g. that of father to son and
in general of elder to younger, that of man to wife and in general
that of ruler to subject. And these friendships differ also from each
other; for it is not the same that exists between parents and children
and between rulers and subjects, nor is even that of father to son
the same as that of son to father, nor that of husband to wife the
same as that of wife to husband. For the virtue and the function of
each of these is different, and so are the reasons for which they
love; the love and the friendship are therefore different also. Each
party, then, neither gets the same from the other, nor ought to seek
it; but when children render to parents what they ought to render
to those who brought them into the world, and parents render what
they should to their children, the friendship of such persons will
be abiding and excellent. In all friendships implying inequality the
love also should be proportional, i.e. the better should be more loved
than he loves, and so should the more useful, and similarly in each
of the other cases; for when the love is in proportion to the merit
of the parties, then in a sense arises equality, which is certainly
held to be characteristic of friendship. 

But equality does not seem to take the same form in acts of justice
and in friendship; for in acts of justice what is equal in the primary
sense is that which is in proportion to merit, while quantitative
equality is secondary, but in friendship quantitative equality is
primary and proportion to merit secondary. This becomes clear if there
is a great interval in respect of virtue or vice or wealth or anything
else between the parties; for then they are no longer friends, and
do not even expect to be so. And this is most manifest in the case
of the gods; for they surpass us most decisively in all good things.
But it is clear also in the case of kings; for with them, too, men
who are much their inferiors do not expect to be friends; nor do men
of no account expect to be friends with the best or wisest men. In
such cases it is not possible to define exactly up to what point friends
can remain friends; for much can be taken away and friendship remain,
but when one party is removed to a great distance, as God is, the
possibility of friendship ceases. This is in fact the origin of the
question whether friends really wish for their friends the greatest
goods, e.g. that of being gods; since in that case their friends will
no longer be friends to them, and therefore will not be good things
for them (for friends are good things). The answer is that if we were
right in saying that friend wishes good to friend for his sake, his
friend must remain the sort of being he is, whatever that may be;
therefore it is for him oily so long as he remains a man that he will
wish the greatest goods. But perhaps not all the greatest goods; for
it is for himself most of all that each man wishes what is good.

8 

Most people seem, owing to ambition, to wish to be loved rather than
to love; which is why most men love flattery; for the flatterer is
a friend in an inferior position, or pretends to be such and to love
more than he is loved; and being loved seems to be akin to being honoured,
and this is what most people aim at. But it seems to be not for its
own sake that people choose honour, but incidentally. For most people
enjoy being honoured by those in positions of authority because of
their hopes (for they think that if they want anything they will get
it from them; and therefore they delight in honour as a token of favour
to come); while those who desire honour from good men, and men who
know, are aiming at confirming their own opinion of themselves; they
delight in honour, therefore, because they believe in their own goodness
on the strength of the judgement of those who speak about them. In
being loved, on the other hand, people delight for its own sake; whence
it would seem to be better than being honoured, and friendship to
be desirable in itself. But it seems to lie in loving rather than
in being loved, as is indicated by the delight mothers take in loving;
for some mothers hand over their children to be brought up, and so
long as they know their fate they love them and do not seek to be
loved in return (if they cannot have both), but seem to be satisfied
if they see them prospering; and they themselves love their children
even if these owing to their ignorance give them nothing of a mother's
due. Now since friendship depends more on loving, and it is those
who love their friends that are praised, loving seems to be the characteristic
virtue of friends, so that it is only those in whom this is found
in due measure that are lasting friends, and only their friendship
that endures. 

It is in this way more than any other that even unequals can be friends;
they can be equalized. Now equality and likeness are friendship, and
especially the likeness of those who are like in virtue; for being
steadfast in themselves they hold fast to each other, and neither
ask nor give base services, but (one may say) even prevent them; for
it is characteristic of good men neither to go wrong themselves nor
to let their friends do so. But wicked men have no steadfastness (for
they do not remain even like to themselves), but become friends for
a short time because they delight in each other's wickedness. Friends
who are useful or pleasant last longer; i.e. as long as they provide
each other with enjoyments or advantages. Friendship for utility's
sake seems to be that which most easily exists between contraries,
e.g. between poor and rich, between ignorant and learned; for what
a man actually lacks he aims at, and one gives something else in return.
But under this head, too, might bring lover and beloved, beautiful
and ugly. This is why lovers sometimes seem ridiculous, when they
demand to be loved as they love; if they are equally lovable their
claim can perhaps be justified, but when they have nothing lovable
about them it is ridiculous. Perhaps, however, contrary does not even
aim at contrary by its own nature, but only incidentally, the desire
being for what is intermediate; for that is what is good, e.g. it
is good for the dry not to become wet but to come to the intermediate
state, and similarly with the hot and in all other cases. These subjects
we may dismiss; for they are indeed somewhat foreign to our inquiry.

9 

Friendship and justice seem, as we have said at the outset of our
discussion, to be concerned with the same objects and exhibited between
the same persons. For in every community there is thought to be some
form of justice, and friendship too; at least men address as friends
their fellow-voyagers and fellowsoldiers, and so too those associated
with them in any other kind of community. And the extent of their
association is the extent of their friendship, as it is the extent
to which justice exists between them. And the proverb 'what friends
have is common property' expresses the truth; for friendship depends
on community. Now brothers and comrades have all things in common,
but the others to whom we have referred have definite things in common-some
more things, others fewer; for of friendships, too, some are more
and others less truly friendships. And the claims of justice differ
too; the duties of parents to children, and those of brothers to each
other are not the same, nor those of comrades and those of fellow-citizens,
and so, too, with the other kinds of friendship. There is a difference,
therefore, also between the acts that are unjust towards each of these
classes of associates, and the injustice increases by being exhibited
towards those who are friends in a fuller sense; e.g. it is a more
terrible thing to defraud a comrade than a fellow-citizen, more terrible
not to help a brother than a stranger, and more terrible to wound
a father than any one else. And the demands of justice also seem to
increase with the intensity of the friendship, which implies that
friendship and justice exist between the same persons and have an
equal extension. 

Now all forms of community are like parts of the political community;
for men journey together with a view to some particular advantage,
and to provide something that they need for the purposes of life;
and it is for the sake of advantage that the political community too
seems both to have come together originally and to endure, for this
is what legislators aim at, and they call just that which is to the
common advantage. Now the other communities aim at advantage bit by
bit, e.g. sailors at what is advantageous on a voyage with a view
to making money or something of the kind, fellow-soldiers at what
is advantageous in war, whether it is wealth or victory or the taking
of a city that they seek, and members of tribes and demes act similarly
(Some communities seem to arise for the sake or pleasure, viz. religious
guilds and social clubs; for these exist respectively for the sake
of offering sacrifice and of companionship. But all these seem to
fall under the political community; for it aims not at present advantage
but at what is advantageous for life as a whole), offering sacrifices
and arranging gatherings for the purpose, and assigning honours to
the gods, and providing pleasant relaxations for themselves. For the
ancient sacrifices and gatherings seem to take place after the harvest
as a sort of firstfruits, because it was at these seasons that people
had most leisure. All the communities, then, seem to be parts of the
political community; and the particular kinds friendship will correspond
to the particular kinds of community. 

10 

There are three kinds of constitution, and an equal number of deviation-forms--perversions,
as it were, of them. The constitutions are monarchy, aristocracy,
and thirdly that which is based on a property qualification, which
it seems appropriate to call timocratic, though most people are wont
to call it polity. The best of these is monarchy, the worst timocracy.
The deviation from monarchy is tyrany; for both are forms of one-man
rule, but there is the greatest difference between them; the tyrant
looks to his own advantage, the king to that of his subjects. For
a man is not a king unless he is sufficient to himself and excels
his subjects in all good things; and such a man needs nothing further;
therefore he will not look to his own interests but to those of his
subjects; for a king who is not like that would be a mere titular
king. Now tyranny is the very contrary of this; the tyrant pursues
his own good. And it is clearer in the case of tyranny that it is
the worst deviation-form; but it is the contrary of the best that
is worst. Monarchy passes over into tyranny; for tyranny is the evil
form of one-man rule and the bad king becomes a tyrant. Aristocracy
passes over into oligarchy by the badness of the rulers, who distribute
contrary to equity what belongs to the city-all or most of the good
things to themselves, and office always to the same people, paying
most regard to wealth; thus the rulers are few and are bad men instead
of the most worthy. Timocracy passes over into democracy; for these
are coterminous, since it is the ideal even of timocracy to be the
rule of the majority, and all who have the property qualification
count as equal. Democracy is the least bad of the deviations; for
in its case the form of constitution is but a slight deviation. These
then are the changes to which constitutions are most subject; for
these are the smallest and easiest transitions. 

One may find resemblances to the constitutions and, as it were, patterns
of them even in households. For the association of a father with his
sons bears the form of monarchy, since the father cares for his children;
and this is why Homer calls Zeus 'father'; it is the ideal of monarchy
to be paternal rule. But among the Persians the rule of the father
is tyrannical; they use their sons as slaves. Tyrannical too is the
rule of a master over slaves; for it is the advantage of the master
that is brought about in it. Now this seems to be a correct form of
government, but the Persian type is perverted; for the modes of rule
appropriate to different relations are diverse. The association of
man and wife seems to be aristocratic; for the man rules in accordance
with his worth, and in those matters in which a man should rule, but
the matters that befit a woman he hands over to her. If the man rules
in everything the relation passes over into oligarchy; for in doing
so he is not acting in accordance with their respective worth, and
not ruling in virtue of his superiority. Sometimes, however, women
rule, because they are heiresses; so their rule is not in virtue of
excellence but due to wealth and power, as in oligarchies. The association
of brothers is like timocracy; for they are equal, except in so far
as they differ in age; hence if they differ much in age, the friendship
is no longer of the fraternal type. Democracy is found chiefly in
masterless dwellings (for here every one is on an equality), and in
those in which the ruler is weak and every one has licence to do as
he pleases. 

11 

Each of the constitutions may be seen to involve friendship just in
so far as it involves justice. The friendship between a king and his
subjects depends on an excess of benefits conferred; for he confers
benefits on his subjects if being a good man he cares for them with
a view to their well-being, as a shepherd does for his sheep (whence
Homer called Agamemnon 'shepherd of the peoples'). Such too is the
friendship of a father, though this exceeds the other in the greatness
of the benefits conferred; for he is responsible for the existence
of his children, which is thought the greatest good, and for their
nurture and upbringing. 

These things are ascribed to ancestors as well. Further, by nature
a father tends to rule over his sons, ancestors over descendants,
a king over his subjects. These friendships imply superiority of one
party over the other, which is why ancestors are honoured. The justice
therefore that exists between persons so related is not the same on
both sides but is in every case proportioned to merit; for that is
true of the friendship as well. The friendship of man and wife, again,
is the same that is found in an aristocracy; for it is in accordance
with virtue the better gets more of what is good, and each gets what
befits him; and so, too, with the justice in these relations. The
friendship of brothers is like that of comrades; for they are equal
and of like age, and such persons are for the most part like in their
feelings and their character. Like this, too, is the friendship appropriate
to timocratic government; for in such a constitution the ideal is
for the citizens to be equal and fair; therefore rule is taken in
turn, and on equal terms; and the friendship appropriate here will
correspond. 

But in the deviation-forms, as justice hardly exists, so too does
friendship. It exists least in the worst form; in tyranny there is
little or no friendship. For where there is nothing common to ruler
and ruled, there is not friendship either, since there is not justice;
e.g. between craftsman and tool, soul and body, master and slave;
the latter in each case is benefited by that which uses it, but there
is no friendship nor justice towards lifeless things. But neither
is there friendship towards a horse or an ox, nor to a slave qua slave.
For there is nothing common to the two parties; the slave is a living
tool and the tool a lifeless slave. Qua slave then, one cannot be
friends with him. But qua man one can; for there seems to be some
justice between any man and any other who can share in a system of
law or be a party to an agreement; therefore there can also be friendship
with him in so far as he is a man. Therefore while in tyrannies friendship
and justice hardly exist, in democracies they exist more fully; for
where the citizens are equal they have much in common. 

12 

Every form of friendship, then, involves association, as has been
said. One might, however, mark off from the rest both the friendship
of kindred and that of comrades. Those of fellow-citizens, fellow-tribesmen,
fellow-voyagers, and the like are more like mere friendships of association;
for they seem to rest on a sort of compact. With them we might class
the friendship of host and guest. The friendship of kinsmen itself,
while it seems to be of many kinds, appears to depend in every case
on parental friendship; for parents love their children as being a
part of themselves, and children their parents as being something
originating from them. Now (1) arents know their offspring better
than there children know that they are their children, and (2) the
originator feels his offspring to be his own more than the offspring
do their begetter; for the product belongs to the producer (e.g. a
tooth or hair or anything else to him whose it is), but the producer
does not belong to the product, or belongs in a less degree. And (3)
the length of time produces the same result; parents love their children
as soon as these are born, but children love their parents only after
time has elapsed and they have acquired understanding or the power
of discrimination by the senses. From these considerations it is also
plain why mothers love more than fathers do. Parents, then, love their
children as themselves (for their issue are by virtue of their separate
existence a sort of other selves), while children love their parents
as being born of them, and brothers love each other as being born
of the same parents; for their identity with them makes them identical
with each other (which is the reason why people talk of 'the same
blood', 'the same stock', and so on). They are, therefore, in a sense
the same thing, though in separate individuals. Two things that contribute
greatly to friendship are a common upbringing and similarity of age;
for 'two of an age take to each other', and people brought up together
tend to be comrades; whence the friendship of brothers is akin to
that of comrades. And cousins and other kinsmen are bound up together
by derivation from brothers, viz. by being derived from the same parents.
They come to be closer together or farther apart by virtue of the
nearness or distance of the original ancestor. 

The friendship of children to parents, and of men to gods, is a relation
to them as to something good and superior; for they have conferred
the greatest benefits, since they are the causes of their being and
of their nourishment, and of their education from their birth; and
this kind of friendship possesses pleasantness and utility also, more
than that of strangers, inasmuch as their life is lived more in common.
The friendship of brothers has the characteristics found in that of
comrades (and especially when these are good), and in general between
people who are like each other, inasmuch as they belong more to each
other and start with a love for each other from their very birth,
and inasmuch as those born of the same parents and brought up together
and similarly educated are more akin in character; and the test of
time has been applied most fully and convincingly in their case.

Between other kinsmen friendly relations are found in due proportion.
Between man and wife friendship seems to exist by nature; for man
is naturally inclined to form couples-even more than to form cities,
inasmuch as the household is earlier and more necessary than the city,
and reproduction is more common to man with the animals. With the
other animals the union extends only to this point, but human beings
live together not only for the sake of reproduction but also for the
various purposes of life; for from the start the functions are divided,
and those of man and woman are different; so they help each other
by throwing their peculiar gifts into the common stock. It is for
these reasons that both utility and pleasure seem to be found in this
kind of friendship. But this friendship may be based also on virtue,
if the parties are good; for each has its own virtue and they will
delight in the fact. And children seem to be a bond of union (which
is the reason why childless people part more easily); for children
are a good common to both and what is common holds them together.

How man and wife and in general friend and friend ought mutually to
behave seems to be the same question as how it is just for them to
behave; for a man does not seem to have the same duties to a friend,
a stranger, a comrade, and a schoolfellow. 

13 

There are three kinds of friendship, as we said at the outset of our
inquiry, and in respect of each some are friends on an equality and
others by virtue of a superiority (for not only can equally good men
become friends but a better man can make friends with a worse, and
similarly in friendships of pleasure or utility the friends may be
equal or unequal in the benefits they confer). This being so, equals
must effect the required equalization on a basis of equality in love
and in all other respects, while unequals must render what is in proportion
to their superiority or inferiority. Complaints and reproaches arise
either only or chiefly in the friendship of utility, and this is only
to be expected. For those who are friends on the ground of virtue
are anxious to do well by each other (since that is a mark of virtue
and of friendship), and between men who are emulating each other in
this there cannot be complaints or quarrels; no one is offended by
a man who loves him and does well by him-if he is a person of nice
feeling he takes his revenge by doing well by the other. And the man
who excels the other in the services he renders will not complain
of his friend, since he gets what he aims at; for each man desires
what is good. Nor do complaints arise much even in friendships of
pleasure; for both get at the same time what they desire, if they
enjoy spending their time together; and even a man who complained
of another for not affording him pleasure would seem ridiculous, since
it is in his power not to spend his days with him. 

But the friendship of utility is full of complaints; for as they use
each other for their own interests they always want to get the better
of the bargain, and think they have got less than they should, and
blame their partners because they do not get all they 'want and deserve';
and those who do well by others cannot help them as much as those
whom they benefit want. 

Now it seems that, as justice is of two kinds, one unwritten and the
other legal, one kind of friendship of utility is moral and the other
legal. And so complaints arise most of all when men do not dissolve
the relation in the spirit of the same type of friendship in which
they contracted it. The legal type is that which is on fixed terms;
its purely commercial variety is on the basis of immediate payment,
while the more liberal variety allows time but stipulates for a definite
quid pro quo. In this variety the debt is clear and not ambiguous,
but in the postponement it contains an element of friendliness; and
so some states do not allow suits arising out of such agreements,
but think men who have bargained on a basis of credit ought to accept
the consequences. The moral type is not on fixed terms; it makes a
gift, or does whatever it does, as to a friend; but one expects to
receive as much or more, as having not given but lent; and if a man
is worse off when the relation is dissolved than he was when it was
contracted he will complain. This happens because all or most men,
while they wish for what is noble, choose what is advantageous; now
it is noble to do well by another without a view to repayment, but
it is the receiving of benefits that is advantageous. Therefore if
we can we should return the equivalent of what we have received (for
we must not make a man our friend against his will; we must recognize
that we were mistaken at the first and took a benefit from a person
we should not have taken it from-since it was not from a friend, nor
from one who did it just for the sake of acting so-and we must settle
up just as if we had been benefited on fixed terms). Indeed, one would
agree to repay if one could (if one could not, even the giver would
not have expected one to do so); therefore if it is possible we must
repay. But at the outset we must consider the man by whom we are being
benefited and on what terms he is acting, in order that we may accept
the benefit on these terms, or else decline it. 

It is disputable whether we ought to measure a service by its utility
to the receiver and make the return with a view to that, or by the
benevolence of the giver. For those who have received say they have
received from their benefactors what meant little to the latter and
what they might have got from others-minimizing the service; while
the givers, on the contrary, say it was the biggest thing they had,
and what could not have been got from others, and that it was given
in times of danger or similar need. Now if the friendship is one that
aims at utility, surely the advantage to the receiver is the measure.
For it is he that asks for the service, and the other man helps him
on the assumption that he will receive the equivalent; so the assistance
has been precisely as great as the advantage to the receiver, and
therefore he must return as much as he has received, or even more
(for that would be nobler). In friendships based on virtue on the
other hand, complaints do not arise, but the purpose of the doer is
a sort of measure; for in purpose lies the essential element of virtue
and character. 

14 

Differences arise also in friendships based on superiority; for each
expects to get more out of them, but when this happens the friendship
is dissolved. Not only does the better man think he ought to get more,
since more should be assigned to a good man, but the more useful similarly
expects this; they say a useless man should not get as much as they
should, since it becomes an act of public service and not a friendship
if the proceeds of the friendship do not answer to the worth of the
benefits conferred. For they think that, as in a commercial partnership
those who put more in get more out, so it should be in friendship.
But the man who is in a state of need and inferiority makes the opposite
claim; they think it is the part of a good friend to help those who
are in need; what, they say, is the use of being the friend of a good
man or a powerful man, if one is to get nothing out of it?

At all events it seems that each party is justified in his claim,
and that each should get more out of the friendship than the other-not
more of the same thing, however, but the superior more honour and
the inferior more gain; for honour is the prize of virtue and of beneficence,
while gain is the assistance required by inferiority. 

It seems to be so in constitutional arrangements also; the man who
contributes nothing good to the common stock is not honoured; for
what belongs to the public is given to the man who benefits the public,
and honour does belong to the public. It is not possible to get wealth
from the common stock and at the same time honour. For no one puts
up with the smaller share in all things; therefore to the man who
loses in wealth they assign honour and to the man who is willing to
be paid, wealth, since the proportion to merit equalizes the parties
and preserves the friendship, as we have said. This then is also the
way in which we should associate with unequals; the man who is benefited
in respect of wealth or virtue must give honour in return, repaying
what he can. For friendship asks a man to do what he can, not what
is proportional to the merits of the case; since that cannot always
be done, e.g. in honours paid to the gods or to parents; for no one
could ever return to them the equivalent of what he gets, but the
man who serves them to the utmost of his power is thought to be a
good man. This is why it would not seem open to a man to disown his
father (though a father may disown his son); being in debt, he should
repay, but there is nothing by doing which a son will have done the
equivalent of what he has received, so that he is always in debt.
But creditors can remit a debt; and a father can therefore do so too.
At the same time it is thought that presumably no one would repudiate
a son who was not far gone in wickedness; for apart from the natural
friendship of father and son it is human nature not to reject a son's
assistance. But the son, if he is wicked, will naturally avoid aiding
his father, or not be zealous about it; for most people wish to get
benefits, but avoid doing them, as a thing unprofitable.-So much for
these questions. 



BOOK IX

1 

In all friendships between dissimilars it is, as we have said, proportion
that equalizes the parties and preserves the friendship; e.g. in the
political form of friendship the shoemaker gets a return for his shoes
in proportion to his worth, and the weaver and all other craftsmen
do the same. Now here a common measure has been provided in the form
of money, and therefore everything is referred to this and measured
by this; but in the friendship of lovers sometimes the lover complains
that his excess of love is not met by love in return though perhaps
there is nothing lovable about him), while often the beloved complains
that the lover who formerly promised everything now performs nothing.
Such incidents happen when the lover loves the beloved for the sake
of pleasure while the beloved loves the lover for the sake of utility,
and they do not both possess the qualities expected of them. If these
be the objects of the friendship it is dissolved when they do not
get the things that formed the motives of their love; for each did
not love the other person himself but the qualities he had, and these
were not enduring; that is why the friendships also are transient.
But the love of characters, as has been said, endures because it is
self-dependent. Differences arise when what they get is something
different and not what they desire; for it is like getting nothing
at all when we do not get what we aim at; compare the story of the
person who made promises to a lyre-player, promising him the more,
the better he sang, but in the morning, when the other demanded the
fulfilment of his promises, said that he had given pleasure for pleasure.
Now if this had been what each wanted, all would have been well; but
if the one wanted enjoyment but the other gain, and the one has what
he wants while the other has not, the terms of the association will
not have been properly fulfilled; for what each in fact wants is what
he attends to, and it is for the sake of that that that he will give
what he has. 

But who is to fix the worth of the service; he who makes the sacrifice
or he who has got the advantage? At any rate the other seems to leave
it to him. This is what they say Protagoras used to do; whenever he
taught anything whatsoever, he bade the learner assess the value of
the knowledge, and accepted the amount so fixed. But in such matters
some men approve of the saying 'let a man have his fixed reward'.
Those who get the money first and then do none of the things they
said they would, owing to the extravagance of their promises, naturally
find themselves the objects of complaint; for they do not fulfil what
they agreed to. The sophists are perhaps compelled to do this because
no one would give money for the things they do know. These people
then, if they do not do what they have been paid for, are naturally
made the objects of complaint. 

But where there is no contract of service, those who give up something
for the sake of the other party cannot (as we have said) be complained
of (for that is the nature of the friendship of virtue), and the return
to them must be made on the basis of their purpose (for it is purpose
that is the characteristic thing in a friend and in virtue). And so
too, it seems, should one make a return to those with whom one has
studied philosophy; for their worth cannot be measured against money,
and they can get no honour which will balance their services, but
still it is perhaps enough, as it is with the gods and with one's
parents, to give them what one can. 

If the gift was not of this sort, but was made with a view to a return,
it is no doubt preferable that the return made should be one that
seems fair to both parties, but if this cannot be achieved, it would
seem not only necessary that the person who gets the first service
should fix the reward, but also just; for if the other gets in return
the equivalent of the advantage the beneficiary has received, or the
price lie would have paid for the pleasure, he will have got what
is fair as from the other. 

We see this happening too with things put up for sale, and in some
places there are laws providing that no actions shall arise out of
voluntary contracts, on the assumption that one should settle with
a person to whom one has given credit, in the spirit in which one
bargained with him. The law holds that it is more just that the person
to whom credit was given should fix the terms than that the person
who gave credit should do so. For most things are not assessed at
the same value by those who have them and those who want them; each
class values highly what is its own and what it is offering; yet the
return is made on the terms fixed by the receiver. But no doubt the
receiver should assess a thing not at what it seems worth when he
has it, but at what he assessed it at before he had it. 

2 

A further problem is set by such questions as, whether one should
in all things give the preference to one's father and obey him, or
whether when one is ill one should trust a doctor, and when one has
to elect a general should elect a man of military skill; and similarly
whether one should render a service by preference to a friend or to
a good man, and should show gratitude to a benefactor or oblige a
friend, if one cannot do both. 

All such questions are hard, are they not, to decide with precision?
For they admit of many variations of all sorts in respect both of
the magnitude of the service and of its nobility necessity. But that
we should not give the preference in all things to the same person
is plain enough; and we must for the most part return benefits rather
than oblige friends, as we must pay back a loan to a creditor rather
than make one to a friend. But perhaps even this is not always true;
e.g. should a man who has been ransomed out of the hands of brigands
ransom his ransomer in return, whoever he may be (or pay him if he
has not been captured but demands payment) or should he ransom his
father? It would seem that he should ransom his father in preference
even to himself. As we have said, then, generally the debt should
be paid, but if the gift is exceedingly noble or exceedingly necessary,
one should defer to these considerations. For sometimes it is not
even fair to return the equivalent of what one has received, when
the one man has done a service to one whom he knows to be good, while
the other makes a return to one whom he believes to be bad. For that
matter, one should sometimes not lend in return to one who has lent
to oneself; for the one person lent to a good man, expecting to recover
his loan, while the other has no hope of recovering from one who is
believed to be bad. Therefore if the facts really are so, the demand
is not fair; and if they are not, but people think they are, they
would be held to be doing nothing strange in refusing. As we have
often pointed out, then, discussions about feelings and actions have
just as much definiteness as their subject-matter. 

That we should not make the same return to every one, nor give a father
the preference in everything, as one does not sacrifice everything
to Zeus, is plain enough; but since we ought to render different things
to parents, brothers, comrades, and benefactors, we ought to render
to each class what is appropriate and becoming. And this is what people
seem in fact to do; to marriages they invite their kinsfolk; for these
have a part in the family and therefore in the doings that affect
the family; and at funerals also they think that kinsfolk, before
all others, should meet, for the same reason. And it would be thought
that in the matter of food we should help our parents before all others,
since we owe our own nourishment to them, and it is more honourable
to help in this respect the authors of our being even before ourselves;
and honour too one should give to one's parents as one does to the
gods, but not any and every honour; for that matter one should not
give the same honour to one's father and one's mother, nor again should
one give them the honour due to a philosopher or to a general, but
the honour due to a father, or again to a mother. To all older persons,
too, one should give honour appropriate to their age, by rising to
receive them and finding seats for them and so on; while to comrades
and brothers one should allow freedom of speech and common use of
all things. To kinsmen, too, and fellow-tribesmen and fellow-citizens
and to every other class one should always try to assign what is appropriate,
and to compare the claims of each class with respect to nearness of
relation and to virtue or usefulness. The comparison is easier when
the persons belong to the same class, and more laborious when they
are different. Yet we must not on that account shrink from the task,
but decide the question as best we can. 

3 

Another question that arises is whether friendships should or should
not be broken off when the other party does not remain the same. Perhaps
we may say that there is nothing strange in breaking off a friendship
based on utility or pleasure, when our friends no longer have these
attributes. For it was of these attributes that we were the friends;
and when these have failed it is reasonable to love no longer. But
one might complain of another if, when he loved us for our usefulness
or pleasantness, he pretended to love us for our character. For, as
we said at the outset, most differences arise between friends when
they are not friends in the spirit in which they think they are. So
when a man has deceived himself and has thought he was being loved
for his character, when the other person was doing nothing of the
kind, he must blame himself; when he has been deceived by the pretences
of the other person, it is just that he should complain against his
deceiver; he will complain with more justice than one does against
people who counterfeit the currency, inasmuch as the wrongdoing is
concerned with something more valuable. 

But if one accepts another man as good, and he turns out badly and
is seen to do so, must one still love him? Surely it is impossible,
since not everything can be loved, but only what is good. What is
evil neither can nor should be loved; for it is not one's duty to
be a lover of evil, nor to become like what is bad; and we have said
that like is dear like. Must the friendship, then, be forthwith broken
off? Or is this not so in all cases, but only when one's friends are
incurable in their wickedness? If they are capable of being reformed
one should rather come to the assistance of their character or their
property, inasmuch as this is better and more characteristic of friendship.
But a man who breaks off such a friendship would seem to be doing
nothing strange; for it was not to a man of this sort that he was
a friend; when his friend has changed, therefore, and he is unable
to save him, he gives him up. 

But if one friend remained the same while the other became better
and far outstripped him in virtue, should the latter treat the former
as a friend? Surely he cannot. When the interval is great this becomes
most plain, e.g. in the case of childish friendships; if one friend
remained a child in intellect while the other became a fully developed
man, how could they be friends when they neither approved of the same
things nor delighted in and were pained by the same things? For not
even with regard to each other will their tastes agree, and without
this (as we saw) they cannot be friends; for they cannot live together.
But we have discussed these matters. 

Should he, then, behave no otherwise towards him than he would if
he had never been his friend? Surely he should keep a remembrance
of their former intimacy, and as we think we ought to oblige friends
rather than strangers, so to those who have been our friends we ought
to make some allowance for our former friendship, when the breach
has not been due to excess of wickedness. 

4 

Friendly relations with one's neighbours, and the marks by which friendships
are defined, seem to have proceeded from a man's relations to himself.
For (1) we define a friend as one who wishes and does what is good,
or seems so, for the sake of his friend, or (2) as one who wishes
his friend to exist and live, for his sake; which mothers do to their
children, and friends do who have come into conflict. And (3) others
define him as one who lives with and (4) has the same tastes as another,
or (5) one who grieves and rejoices with his friend; and this too
is found in mothers most of all. It is by some one of these characterstics
that friendship too is defined. 

Now each of these is true of the good man's relation to himself (and
of all other men in so far as they think themselves good; virtue and
the good man seem, as has been said, to be the measure of every class
of things). For his opinions are harmonious, and he desires the same
things with all his soul; and therefore he wishes for himself what
is good and what seems so, and does it (for it is characteristic of
the good man to work out the good), and does so for his own sake (for
he does it for the sake of the intellectual element in him, which
is thought to be the man himself); and he wishes himself to live and
be preserved, and especially the element by virtue of which he thinks.
For existence is good to the virtuous man, and each man wishes himself
what is good, while no one chooses to possess the whole world if he
has first to become some one else (for that matter, even now God possesses
the good); he wishes for this only on condition of being whatever
he is; and the element that thinks would seem to be the individual
man, or to be so more than any other element in him. And such a man
wishes to live with himself; for he does so with pleasure, since the
memories of his past acts are delightful and his hopes for the future
are good, and therefore pleasant. His mind is well stored too with
subjects of contemplation. And he grieves and rejoices, more than
any other, with himself; for the same thing is always painful, and
the same thing always pleasant, and not one thing at one time and
another at another; he has, so to speak, nothing to repent of.

Therefore, since each of these characteristics belongs to the good
man in relation to himself, and he is related to his friend as to
himself (for his friend is another self), friendship too is thought
to be one of these attributes, and those who have these attributes
to be friends. Whether there is or is not friendship between a man
and himself is a question we may dismiss for the present; there would
seem to be friendship in so far as he is two or more, to judge from
the afore-mentioned attributes of friendship, and from the fact that
the extreme of friendship is likened to one's love for oneself.

But the attributes named seem to belong even to the majority of men,
poor creatures though they may be. Are we to say then that in so far
as they are satisfied with themselves and think they are good, they
share in these attributes? Certainly no one who is thoroughly bad
and impious has these attributes, or even seems to do so. They hardly
belong even to inferior people; for they are at variance with themselves,
and have appetites for some things and rational desires for others.
This is true, for instance, of incontinent people; for they choose,
instead of the things they themselves think good, things that are
pleasant but hurtful; while others again, through cowardice and laziness,
shrink from doing what they think best for themselves. And those who
have done many terrible deeds and are hated for their wickedness even
shrink from life and destroy themselves. And wicked men seek for people
with whom to spend their days, and shun themselves; for they remember
many a grevious deed, and anticipate others like them, when they are
by themselves, but when they are with others they forget. And having
nothing lovable in them they have no feeling of love to themselves.
Therefore also such men do not rejoice or grieve with themselves;
for their soul is rent by faction, and one element in it by reason
of its wickedness grieves when it abstains from certain acts, while
the other part is pleased, and one draws them this way and the other
that, as if they were pulling them in pieces. If a man cannot at the
same time be pained and pleased, at all events after a short time
he is pained because he was pleased, and he could have wished that
these things had not been pleasant to him; for bad men are laden with
repentance. 

Therefore the bad man does not seem to be amicably disposed even to
himself, because there is nothing in him to love; so that if to be
thus is the height of wretchedness, we should strain every nerve to
avoid wickedness and should endeavour to be good; for so and only
so can one be either friendly to oneself or a friend to another.

5 

Goodwill is a friendly sort of relation, but is not identical with
friendship; for one may have goodwill both towards people whom one
does not know, and without their knowing it, but not friendship. This
has indeed been said already.' But goodwill is not even friendly feeling.
For it does not involve intensity or desire, whereas these accompany
friendly feeling; and friendly feeling implies intimacy while goodwill
may arise of a sudden, as it does towards competitors in a contest;
we come to feel goodwill for them and to share in their wishes, but
we would not do anything with them; for, as we said, we feel goodwill
suddenly and love them only superficially. 

Goodwill seems, then, to be a beginning of friendship, as the pleasure
of the eye is the beginning of love. For no one loves if he has not
first been delighted by the form of the beloved, but he who delights
in the form of another does not, for all that, love him, but only
does so when he also longs for him when absent and craves for his
presence; so too it is not possible for people to be friends if they
have not come to feel goodwill for each other, but those who feel
goodwill are not for all that friends; for they only wish well to
those for whom they feel goodwill, and would not do anything with
them nor take trouble for them. And so one might by an extension of
the term friendship say that goodwill is inactive friendship, though
when it is prolonged and reaches the point of intimacy it becomes
friendship-not the friendship based on utility nor that based on pleasure;
for goodwill too does not arise on those terms. The man who has received
a benefit bestows goodwill in return for what has been done to him,
but in doing so is only doing what is just; while he who wishes some
one to prosper because he hopes for enrichment through him seems to
have goodwill not to him but rather to himself, just as a man is not
a friend to another if he cherishes him for the sake of some use to
be made of him. In general, goodwill arises on account of some excellence
and worth, when one man seems to another beautiful or brave or something
of the sort, as we pointed out in the case of competitors in a contest.

6 

Unanimity also seems to be a friendly relation. For this reason it
is not identity of opinion; for that might occur even with people
who do not know each other; nor do we say that people who have the
same views on any and every subject are unanimous, e.g. those who
agree about the heavenly bodies (for unanimity about these is not
a friendly relation), but we do say that a city is unanimous when
men have the same opinion about what is to their interest, and choose
the same actions, and do what they have resolved in common. It is
about things to be done, therefore, that people are said to be unanimous,
and, among these, about matters of consequence and in which it is
possible for both or all parties to get what they want; e.g. a city
is unanimous when all its citizens think that the offices in it should
be elective, or that they should form an alliance with Sparta, or
that Pittacus should be their ruler-at a time when he himself was
also willing to rule. But when each of two people wishes himself to
have the thing in question, like the captains in the Phoenissae, they
are in a state of faction; for it is not unanimity when each of two
parties thinks of the same thing, whatever that may be, but only when
they think of the same thing in the same hands, e.g. when both the
common people and those of the better class wish the best men to rule;
for thus and thus alone do all get what they aim at. Unanimity seems,
then, to be political friendship, as indeed it is commonly said to
be; for it is concerned with things that are to our interest and have
an influence on our life. 

Now such unanimity is found among good men; for they are unanimous
both in themselves and with one another, being, so to say, of one
mind (for the wishes of such men are constant and not at the mercy
of opposing currents like a strait of the sea), and they wish for
what is just and what is advantageous, and these are the objects of
their common endeavour as well. But bad men cannot be unanimous except
to a small extent, any more than they can be friends, since they aim
at getting more than their share of advantages, while in labour and
public service they fall short of their share; and each man wishing
for advantage to himself criticizes his neighbour and stands in his
way; for if people do not watch it carefully the common weal is soon
destroyed. The result is that they are in a state of faction, putting
compulsion on each other but unwilling themselves to do what is just.

7 

Benefactors are thought to love those they have benefited, more than
those who have been well treated love those that have treated them
well, and this is discussed as though it were paradoxical. Most people
think it is because the latter are in the position of debtors and
the former of creditors; and therefore as, in the case of loans, debtors
wish their creditors did not exist, while creditors actually take
care of the safety of their debtors, so it is thought that benefactors
wish the objects of their action to exist since they will then get
their gratitude, while the beneficiaries take no interest in making
this return. Epicharmus would perhaps declare that they say this because
they 'look at things on their bad side', but it is quite like human
nature; for most people are forgetful, and are more anxious to be
well treated than to treat others well. But the cause would seem to
be more deeply rooted in the nature of things; the case of those who
have lent money is not even analogous. For they have no friendly feeling
to their debtors, but only a wish that they may kept safe with a view
to what is to be got from them; while those who have done a service
to others feel friendship and love for those they have served even
if these are not of any use to them and never will be. This is what
happens with craftsmen too; every man loves his own handiwork better
than he would be loved by it if it came alive; and this happens perhaps
most of all with poets; for they have an excessive love for their
own poems, doting on them as if they were their children. This is
what the position of benefactors is like; for that which they have
treated well is their handiwork, and therefore they love this more
than the handiwork does its maker. The cause of this is that existence
is to all men a thing to be chosen and loved, and that we exist by
virtue of activity (i.e. by living and acting), and that the handiwork
is in a sense, the producer in activity; he loves his handiwork, therefore,
because he loves existence. And this is rooted in the nature of things;
for what he is in potentiality, his handiwork manifests in activity.

At the same time to the benefactor that is noble which depends on
his action, so that he delights in the object of his action, whereas
to the patient there is nothing noble in the agent, but at most something
advantageous, and this is less pleasant and lovable. What is pleasant
is the activity of the present, the hope of the future, the memory
of the past; but most pleasant is that which depends on activity,
and similarly this is most lovable. Now for a man who has made something
his work remains (for the noble is lasting), but for the person acted
on the utility passes away. And the memory of noble things is pleasant,
but that of useful things is not likely to be pleasant, or is less
so; though the reverse seems true of expectation. 

Further, love is like activity, being loved like passivity; and loving
and its concomitants are attributes of those who are the more active.

Again, all men love more what they have won by labour; e.g. those
who have made their money love it more than those who have inherited
it; and to be well treated seems to involve no labour, while to treat
others well is a laborious task. These are the reasons, too, why mothers
are fonder of their children than fathers; bringing them into the
world costs them more pains, and they know better that the children
are their own. This last point, too, would seem to apply to benefactors.

8 

The question is also debated, whether a man should love himself most,
or some one else. People criticize those who love themselves most,
and call them self-lovers, using this as an epithet of disgrace, and
a bad man seems to do everything for his own sake, and the more so
the more wicked he is-and so men reproach him, for instance, with
doing nothing of his own accord-while the good man acts for honour's
sake, and the more so the better he is, and acts for his friend's
sake, and sacrifices his own interest. 

But the facts clash with these arguments, and this is not surprising.
For men say that one ought to love best one's best friend, and man's
best friend is one who wishes well to the object of his wish for his
sake, even if no one is to know of it; and these attributes are found
most of all in a man's attitude towards himself, and so are all the
other attributes by which a friend is defined; for, as we have said,
it is from this relation that all the characteristics of friendship
have extended to our neighbours. All the proverbs, too, agree with
this, e.g. 'a single soul', and 'what friends have is common property',
and 'friendship is equality', and 'charity begins at home'; for all
these marks will be found most in a man's relation to himself; he
is his own best friend and therefore ought to love himself best. It
is therefore a reasonable question, which of the two views we should
follow; for both are plausible. 

Perhaps we ought to mark off such arguments from each other and determine
how far and in what respects each view is right. Now if we grasp the
sense in which each school uses the phrase 'lover of self', the truth
may become evident. Those who use the term as one of reproach ascribe
self-love to people who assign to themselves the greater share of
wealth, honours, and bodily pleasures; for these are what most people
desire, and busy themselves about as though they were the best of
all things, which is the reason, too, why they become objects of competition.
So those who are grasping with regard to these things gratify their
appetites and in general their feelings and the irrational element
of the soul; and most men are of this nature (which is the reason
why the epithet has come to be used as it is-it takes its meaning
from the prevailing type of self-love, which is a bad one); it is
just, therefore, that men who are lovers of self in this way are reproached
for being so. That it is those who give themselves the preference
in regard to objects of this sort that most people usually call lovers
of self is plain; for if a man were always anxious that he himself,
above all things, should act justly, temperately, or in accordance
with any other of the virtues, and in general were always to try to
secure for himself the honourable course, no one will call such a
man a lover of self or blame him. 

But such a man would seem more than the other a lover of self; at
all events he assigns to himself the things that are noblest and best,
and gratifies the most authoritative element in and in all things
obeys this; and just as a city or any other systematic whole is most
properly identified with the most authoritative element in it, so
is a man; and therefore the man who loves this and gratifies it is
most of all a lover of self. Besides, a man is said to have or not
to have self-control according as his reason has or has not the control,
on the assumption that this is the man himself; and the things men
have done on a rational principle are thought most properly their
own acts and voluntary acts. That this is the man himself, then, or
is so more than anything else, is plain, and also that the good man
loves most this part of him. Whence it follows that he is most truly
a lover of self, of another type than that which is a matter of reproach,
and as different from that as living according to a rational principle
is from living as passion dictates, and desiring what is noble from
desiring what seems advantageous. Those, then, who busy themselves
in an exceptional degree with noble actions all men approve and praise;
and if all were to strive towards what is noble and strain every nerve
to do the noblest deeds, everything would be as it should be for the
common weal, and every one would secure for himself the goods that
are greatest, since virtue is the greatest of goods. 

Therefore the good man should be a lover of self (for he will both
himself profit by doing noble acts, and will benefit his fellows),
but the wicked man should not; for he will hurt both himself and his
neighbours, following as he does evil passions. For the wicked man,
what he does clashes with what he ought to do, but what the good man
ought to do he does; for reason in each of its possessors chooses
what is best for itself, and the good man obeys his reason. It is
true of the good man too that he does many acts for the sake of his
friends and his country, and if necessary dies for them; for he will
throw away both wealth and honours and in general the goods that are
objects of competition, gaining for himself nobility; since he would
prefer a short period of intense pleasure to a long one of mild enjoyment,
a twelvemonth of noble life to many years of humdrum existence, and
one great and noble action to many trivial ones. Now those who die
for others doubtless attain this result; it is therefore a great prize
that they choose for themselves. They will throw away wealth too on
condition that their friends will gain more; for while a man's friend
gains wealth he himself achieves nobility; he is therefore assigning
the greater good to himself. The same too is true of honour and office;
all these things he will sacrifice to his friend; for this is noble
and laudable for himself. Rightly then is he thought to be good, since
he chooses nobility before all else. But he may even give up actions
to his friend; it may be nobler to become the cause of his friend's
acting than to act himself. In all the actions, therefore, that men
are praised for, the good man is seen to assign to himself the greater
share in what is noble. In this sense, then, as has been said, a man
should be a lover of self; but in the sense in which most men are
so, he ought not. 

9 

It is also disputed whether the happy man will need friends or not.
It is said that those who are supremely happy and self-sufficient
have no need of friends; for they have the things that are good, and
therefore being self-sufficient they need nothing further, while a
friend, being another self, furnishes what a man cannot provide by
his own effort; whence the saying 'when fortune is kind, what need
of friends?' But it seems strange, when one assigns all good things
to the happy man, not to assign friends, who are thought the greatest
of external goods. And if it is more characteristic of a friend to
do well by another than to be well done by, and to confer benefits
is characteristic of the good man and of virtue, and it is nobler
to do well by friends than by strangers, the good man will need people
to do well by. This is why the question is asked whether we need friends
more in prosperity or in adversity, on the assumption that not only
does a man in adversity need people to confer benefits on him, but
also those who are prospering need people to do well by. Surely it
is strange, too, to make the supremely happy man a solitary; for no
one would choose the whole world on condition of being alone, since
man is a political creature and one whose nature is to live with others.
Therefore even the happy man lives with others; for he has the things
that are by nature good. And plainly it is better to spend his days
with friends and good men than with strangers or any chance persons.
Therefore the happy man needs friends. 

What then is it that the first school means, and in what respect is
it right? Is it that most identify friends with useful people? Of
such friends indeed the supremely happy man will have no need, since
he already has the things that are good; nor will he need those whom
one makes one's friends because of their pleasantness, or he will
need them only to a small extent (for his life, being pleasant, has
no need of adventitious pleasure); and because he does not need such
friends he is thought not to need friends. 

But that is surely not true. For we have said at the outset that happiness
is an activity; and activity plainly comes into being and is not present
at the start like a piece of property. If (1) happiness lies in living
and being active, and the good man's activity is virtuous and pleasant
in itself, as we have said at the outset, and (2) a thing's being
one's own is one of the attributes that make it pleasant, and (3)
we can contemplate our neighbours better than ourselves and their
actions better than our own, and if the actions of virtuous men who
are their friends are pleasant to good men (since these have both
the attributes that are naturally pleasant),-if this be so, the supremely
happy man will need friends of this sort, since his purpose is to
contemplate worthy actions and actions that are his own, and the actions
of a good man who is his friend have both these qualities.

Further, men think that the happy man ought to live pleasantly. Now
if he were a solitary, life would be hard for him; for by oneself
it is not easy to be continuously active; but with others and towards
others it is easier. With others therefore his activity will be more
continuous, and it is in itself pleasant, as it ought to be for the
man who is supremely happy; for a good man qua good delights in virtuous
actions and is vexed at vicious ones, as a musical man enjoys beautiful
tunes but is pained at bad ones. A certain training in virtue arises
also from the company of the good, as Theognis has said before us.

If we look deeper into the nature of things, a virtuous friend seems
to be naturally desirable for a virtuous man. For that which is good
by nature, we have said, is for the virtuous man good and pleasant
in itself. Now life is defined in the case of animals by the power
of perception in that of man by the power of perception or thought;
and a power is defined by reference to the corresponding activity,
which is the essential thing; therefore life seems to be essentially
the act of perceiving or thinking. And life is among the things that
are good and pleasant in themselves, since it is determinate and the
determinate is of the nature of the good; and that which is good by
nature is also good for the virtuous man (which is the reason why
life seems pleasant to all men); but we must not apply this to a wicked
and corrupt life nor to a life spent in pain; for such a life is indeterminate,
as are its attributes. The nature of pain will become plainer in what
follows. But if life itself is good and pleasant (which it seems to
be, from the very fact that all men desire it, and particularly those
who are good and supremely happy; for to such men life is most desirable,
and their existence is the most supremely happy) and if he who sees
perceives that he sees, and he who hears, that he hears, and he who
walks, that he walks, and in the case of all other activities similarly
there is something which perceives that we are active, so that if
we perceive, we perceive that we perceive, and if we think, that we
think; and if to perceive that we perceive or think is to perceive
that we exist (for existence was defined as perceiving or thinking);
and if perceiving that one lives is in itself one of the things that
are pleasant (for life is by nature good, and to perceive what is
good present in oneself is pleasant); and if life is desirable, and
particularly so for good men, because to them existence is good and
pleasant for they are pleased at the consciousness of the presence
in them of what is in itself good); and if as the virtuous man is
to himself, he is to his friend also (for his friend is another self):-if
all this be true, as his own being is desirable for each man, so,
or almost so, is that of his friend. Now his being was seen to be
desirable because he perceived his own goodness, and such perception
is pleasant in itself. He needs, therefore, to be conscious of the
existence of his friend as well, and this will be realized in their
living together and sharing in discussion and thought; for this is
what living together would seem to mean in the case of man, and not,
as in the case of cattle, feeding in the same place. 

If, then, being is in itself desirable for the supremely happy man
(since it is by its nature good and pleasant), and that of his friend
is very much the same, a friend will be one of the things that are
desirable. Now that which is desirable for him he must have, or he
will be deficient in this respect. The man who is to be happy will
therefore need virtuous friends. 

10 

Should we, then, make as many friends as possible, or-as in the case
of hospitality it is thought to be suitable advice, that one should
be 'neither a man of many guests nor a man with none'-will that apply
to friendship as well; should a man neither be friendless nor have
an excessive number of friends? 

To friends made with a view to utility this saying would seem thoroughly
applicable; for to do services to many people in return is a laborious
task and life is not long enough for its performance. Therefore friends
in excess of those who are sufficient for our own life are superfluous,
and hindrances to the noble life; so that we have no need of them.
Of friends made with a view to pleasure, also, few are enough, as
a little seasoning in food is enough. 

But as regards good friends, should we have as many as possible, or
is there a limit to the number of one's friends, as there is to the
size of a city? You cannot make a city of ten men, and if there are
a hundred thousand it is a city no longer. But the proper number is
presumably not a single number, but anything that falls between certain
fixed points. So for friends too there is a fixed number perhaps the
largest number with whom one can live together (for that, we found,
thought to be very characteristic of friendship); and that one cannot
live with many people and divide oneself up among them is plain. Further,
they too must be friends of one another, if they are all to spend
their days together; and it is a hard business for this condition
to be fulfilled with a large number. It is found difficult, too, to
rejoice and to grieve in an intimate way with many people, for it
may likely happen that one has at once to be happy with one friend
and to mourn with another. Presumably, then, it is well not to seek
to have as many friends as possible, but as many as are enough for
the purpose of living together; for it would seem actually impossible
to be a great friend to many people. This is why one cannot love several
people; love is ideally a sort of excess of friendship, and that can
only be felt towards one person; therefore great friendship too can
only be felt towards a few people. This seems to be confirmed in practice;
for we do not find many people who are friends in the comradely way
of friendship, and the famous friendships of this sort are always
between two people. Those who have many friends and mix intimately
with them all are thought to be no one's friend, except in the way
proper to fellow-citizens, and such people are also called obsequious.
In the way proper to fellow-citizens, indeed, it is possible to be
the friend of many and yet not be obsequious but a genuinely good
man; but one cannot have with many people the friendship based on
virtue and on the character of our friends themselves, and we must
be content if we find even a few such. 

11 

Do we need friends more in good fortune or in bad? They are sought
after in both; for while men in adversity need help, in prosperity
they need people to live with and to make the objects of their beneficence;
for they wish to do well by others. Friendship, then, is more necessary
in bad fortune, and so it is useful friends that one wants in this
case; but it is more noble in good fortune, and so we also seek for
good men as our friends, since it is more desirable to confer benefits
on these and to live with these. For the very presence of friends
is pleasant both in good fortune and also in bad, since grief is lightened
when friends sorrow with us. Hence one might ask whether they share
as it were our burden, or-without that happening-their presence by
its pleasantness, and the thought of their grieving with us, make
our pain less. Whether it is for these reasons or for some other that
our grief is lightened, is a question that may be dismissed; at all
events what we have described appears to take place. 

But their presence seems to contain a mixture of various factors.
The very seeing of one's friends is pleasant, especially if one is
in adversity, and becomes a safeguard against grief (for a friend
tends to comfort us both by the sight of him and by his words, if
he is tactful, since he knows our character and the things that please
or pain us); but to see him pained at our misfortunes is painful;
for every one shuns being a cause of pain to his friends. For this
reason people of a manly nature guard against making their friends
grieve with them, and, unless he be exceptionally insensible to pain,
such a man cannot stand the pain that ensues for his friends, and
in general does not admit fellow-mourners because he is not himself
given to mourning; but women and womanly men enjoy sympathisers in
their grief, and love them as friends and companions in sorrow. But
in all things one obviously ought to imitate the better type of person.

On the other hand, the presence of friends in our prosperity implies
both a pleasant passing of our time and the pleasant thought of their
pleasure at our own good fortune. For this cause it would seem that
we ought to summon our friends readily to share our good fortunes
(for the beneficent character is a noble one), but summon them to
our bad fortunes with hesitation; for we ought to give them as little
a share as possible in our evils whence the saying 'enough is my misfortune'.
We should summon friends to us most of all when they are likely by
suffering a few inconveniences to do us a great service.

Conversely, it is fitting to go unasked and readily to the aid of
those in adversity (for it is characteristic of a friend to render
services, and especially to those who are in need and have not demanded
them; such action is nobler and pleasanter for both persons); but
when our friends are prosperous we should join readily in their activities
(for they need friends for these too), but be tardy in coming forward
to be the objects of their kindness; for it is not noble to be keen
to receive benefits. Still, we must no doubt avoid getting the reputation
of kill-joys by repulsing them; for that sometimes happens.

The presence of friends, then, seems desirable in all circumstances.

12 

Does it not follow, then, that, as for lovers the sight of the beloved
is the thing they love most, and they prefer this sense to the others
because on it love depends most for its being and for its origin,
so for friends the most desirable thing is living together? For friendship
is a partnership, and as a man is to himself, so is he to his friend;
now in his own case the consciousness of his being is desirable, and
so therefore is the consciousness of his friend's being, and the activity
of this consciousness is produced when they live together, so that
it is natural that they aim at this. And whatever existence means
for each class of men, whatever it is for whose sake they value life,
in that they wish to occupy themselves with their friends; and so
some drink together, others dice together, others join in athletic
exercises and hunting, or in the study of philosophy, each class spending
their days together in whatever they love most in life; for since
they wish to live with their friends, they do and share in those things
which give them the sense of living together. Thus the friendship
of bad men turns out an evil thing (for because of their instability
they unite in bad pursuits, and besides they become evil by becoming
like each other), while the friendship of good men is good, being
augmented by their companionship; and they are thought to become better
too by their activities and by improving each other; for from each
other they take the mould of the characteristics they approve-whence
the saying 'noble deeds from noble men'.-So much, then, for friendship;
our next task must be to discuss pleasure. 



BOOK X

1 

After these matters we ought perhaps next to discuss pleasure. For
it is thought to be most intimately connected with our human nature,
which is the reason why in educating the young we steer them by the
rudders of pleasure and pain; it is thought, too, that to enjoy the
things we ought and to hate the things we ought has the greatest bearing
on virtue of character. For these things extend right through life,
with a weight and power of their own in respect both to virtue and
to the happy life, since men choose what is pleasant and avoid what
is painful; and such things, it will be thought, we should least of
all omit to discuss, especially since they admit of much dispute.
For some say pleasure is the good, while others, on the contrary,
say it is thoroughly bad-some no doubt being persuaded that the facts
are so, and others thinking it has a better effect on our life to
exhibit pleasure as a bad thing even if it is not; for most people
(they think) incline towards it and are the slaves of their pleasures,
for which reason they ought to lead them in the opposite direction,
since thus they will reach the middle state. But surely this is not
correct. For arguments about matters concerned with feelings and actions
are less reliable than facts: and so when they clash with the facts
of perception they are despised, and discredit the truth as well;
if a man who runs down pleasure is once seen to be alming at it, his
inclining towards it is thought to imply that it is all worthy of
being aimed at; for most people are not good at drawing distinctions.
True arguments seem, then, most useful, not only with a view to knowledge,
but with a view to life also; for since they harmonize with the facts
they are believed, and so they stimulate those who understand them
to live according to them.-Enough of such questions; let us proceed
to review the opinions that have been expressed about pleasure.

2 

Eudoxus thought pleasure was the good because he saw all things, both
rational and irrational, aiming at it, and because in all things that
which is the object of choice is what is excellent, and that which
is most the object of choice the greatest good; thus the fact that
all things moved towards the same object indicated that this was for
all things the chief good (for each thing, he argued, finds its own
good, as it finds its own nourishment); and that which is good for
all things and at which all aim was the good. His arguments were credited
more because of the excellence of his character than for their own
sake; he was thought to be remarkably self-controlled, and therefore
it was thought that he was not saying what he did say as a friend
of pleasure, but that the facts really were so. He believed that the
same conclusion followed no less plainly from a study of the contrary
of pleasure; pain was in itself an object of aversion to all things,
and therefore its contrary must be similarly an object of choice.
And again that is most an object of choice which we choose not because
or for the sake of something else, and pleasure is admittedly of this
nature; for no one asks to what end he is pleased, thus implying that
pleasure is in itself an object of choice. Further, he argued that
pleasure when added to any good, e.g. to just or temperate action,
makes it more worthy of choice, and that it is only by itself that
the good can be increased. 

This argument seems to show it to be one of the goods, and no more
a good than any other; for every good is more worthy of choice along
with another good than taken alone. And so it is by an argument of
this kind that Plato proves the good not to be pleasure; he argues
that the pleasant life is more desirable with wisdom than without,
and that if the mixture is better, pleasure is not the good; for the
good cannot become more desirable by the addition of anything to it.
Now it is clear that nothing else, any more than pleasure, can be
the good if it is made more desirable by the addition of any of the
things that are good in themselves. What, then, is there that satisfies
this criterion, which at the same time we can participate in? It is
something of this sort that we are looking for. Those who object that
that at which all things aim is not necessarily good are, we may surmise,
talking nonsense. For we say that that which every one thinks really
is so; and the man who attacks this belief will hardly have anything
more credible to maintain instead. If it is senseless creatures that
desire the things in question, there might be something in what they
say; but if intelligent creatures do so as well, what sense can there
be in this view? But perhaps even in inferior creatures there is some
natural good stronger than themselves which aims at their proper good.

Nor does the argument about the contrary of pleasure seem to be correct.
They say that if pain is an evil it does not follow that pleasure
is a good; for evil is opposed to evil and at the same time both are
opposed to the neutral state-which is correct enough but does not
apply to the things in question. For if both pleasure and pain belonged
to the class of evils they ought both to be objects of aversion, while
if they belonged to the class of neutrals neither should be an object
of aversion or they should both be equally so; but in fact people
evidently avoid the one as evil and choose the other as good; that
then must be the nature of the opposition between them. 

3 

Nor again, if pleasure is not a quality, does it follow that it is
not a good; for the activities of virtue are not qualities either,
nor is happiness. They say, however, that the good is determinate,
while pleasure is indeterminate, because it admits of degrees. Now
if it is from the feeling of pleasure that they judge thus, the same
will be true of justice and the other virtues, in respect of which
we plainly say that people of a certain character are so more or less,
and act more or less in accordance with these virtues; for people
may be more just or brave, and it is possible also to act justly or
temperately more or less. But if their judgement is based on the various
pleasures, surely they are not stating the real cause, if in fact
some pleasures are unmixed and others mixed. Again, just as health
admits of degrees without being indeterminate, why should not pleasure?
The same proportion is not found in all things, nor a single proportion
always in the same thing, but it may be relaxed and yet persist up
to a point, and it may differ in degree. The case of pleasure also
may therefore be of this kind. 

Again, they assume that the good is perfect while movements and comings
into being are imperfect, and try to exhibit pleasure as being a movement
and a coming into being. But they do not seem to be right even in
saying that it is a movement. For speed and slowness are thought to
be proper to every movement, and if a movement, e.g. that of the heavens,
has not speed or slowness in itself, it has it in relation to something
else; but of pleasure neither of these things is true. For while we
may become pleased quickly as we may become angry quickly, we cannot
be pleased quickly, not even in relation to some one else, while we
can walk, or grow, or the like, quickly. While, then, we can change
quickly or slowly into a state of pleasure, we cannot quickly exhibit
the activity of pleasure, i.e. be pleased. Again, how can it be a
coming into being? It is not thought that any chance thing can come
out of any chance thing, but that a thing is dissolved into that out
of which it comes into being; and pain would be the destruction of
that of which pleasure is the coming into being. 

They say, too, that pain is the lack of that which is according to
nature, and pleasure is replenishment. But these experiences are bodily.
If then pleasure is replenishment with that which is according to
nature, that which feels pleasure will be that in which the replenishment
takes place, i.e. the body; but that is not thought to be the case;
therefore the replenishment is not pleasure, though one would be pleased
when replenishment was taking place, just as one would be pained if
one was being operated on. This opinion seems to be based on the pains
and pleasures connected with nutrition; on the fact that when people
have been short of food and have felt pain beforehand they are pleased
by the replenishment. But this does not happen with all pleasures;
for the pleasures of learning and, among the sensuous pleasures, those
of smell, and also many sounds and sights, and memories and hopes,
do not presuppose pain. Of what then will these be the coming into
being? There has not been lack of anything of which they could be
the supplying anew. 

In reply to those who bring forward the disgraceful pleasures one
may say that these are not pleasant; if things are pleasant to people
of vicious constitution, we must not suppose that they are also pleasant
to others than these, just as we do not reason so about the things
that are wholesome or sweet or bitter to sick people, or ascribe whiteness
to the things that seem white to those suffering from a disease of
the eye. Or one might answer thus-that the pleasures are desirable,
but not from these sources, as wealth is desirable, but not as the
reward of betrayal, and health, but not at the cost of eating anything
and everything. Or perhaps pleasures differ in kind; for those derived
from noble sources are different from those derived from base sources,
and one cannot the pleasure of the just man without being just, nor
that of the musical man without being musical, and so on.

The fact, too, that a friend is different from a flatterer seems to
make it plain that pleasure is not a good or that pleasures are different
in kind; for the one is thought to consort with us with a view to
the good, the other with a view to our pleasure, and the one is reproached
for his conduct while the other is praised on the ground that he consorts
with us for different ends. And no one would choose to live with the
intellect of a child throughout his life, however much he were to
be pleased at the things that children are pleased at, nor to get
enjoyment by doing some most disgraceful deed, though he were never
to feel any pain in consequence. And there are many things we should
be keen about even if they brought no pleasure, e.g. seeing, remembering,
knowing, possessing the virtues. If pleasures necessarily do accompany
these, that makes no odds; we should choose these even if no pleasure
resulted. It seems to be clear, then, that neither is pleasure the
good nor is all pleasure desirable, and that some pleasures are desirable
in themselves, differing in kind or in their sources from the others.
So much for the things that are said about pleasure and pain.

4 

What pleasure is, or what kind of thing it is, will become plainer
if we take up the question aga from the beginning. Seeing seems to
be at any moment complete, for it does not lack anything which coming
into being later will complete its form; and pleasure also seems to
be of this nature. For it is a whole, and at no time can one find
a pleasure whose form will be completed if the pleasure lasts longer.
For this reason, too, it is not a movement. For every movement (e.g.
that of building) takes time and is for the sake of an end, and is
complete when it has made what it aims at. It is complete, therefore,
only in the whole time or at that final moment. In their parts and
during the time they occupy, all movements are incomplete, and are
different in kind from the whole movement and from each other. For
the fitting together of the stones is different from the fluting of
the column, and these are both different from the making of the temple;
and the making of the temple is complete (for it lacks nothing with
a view to the end proposed), but the making of the base or of the
triglyph is incomplete; for each is the making of only a part. They
differ in kind, then, and it is not possible to find at any and every
time a movement complete in form, but if at all, only in the whole
time. So, too, in the case of walking and all other movements. For
if locomotion is a movement from to there, it, too, has differences
in kind-flying, walking, leaping, and so on. And not only so, but
in walking itself there are such differences; for the whence and whither
are not the same in the whole racecourse and in a part of it, nor
in one part and in another, nor is it the same thing to traverse this
line and that; for one traverses not only a line but one which is
in a place, and this one is in a different place from that. We have
discussed movement with precision in another work, but it seems that
it is not complete at any and every time, but that the many movements
are incomplete and different in kind, since the whence and whither
give them their form. But of pleasure the form is complete at any
and every time. Plainly, then, pleasure and movement must be different
from each other, and pleasure must be one of the things that are whole
and complete. This would seem to be the case, too, from the fact that
it is not possible to move otherwise than in time, but it is possible
to be pleased; for that which takes place in a moment is a whole.

From these considerations it is clear, too, that these thinkers are
not right in saying there is a movement or a coming into being of
pleasure. For these cannot be ascribed to all things, but only to
those that are divisible and not wholes; there is no coming into being
of seeing nor of a point nor of a unit, nor is any of these a movement
or coming into being; therefore there is no movement or coming into
being of pleasure either; for it is a whole. 

Since every sense is active in relation to its object, and a sense
which is in good condition acts perfectly in relation to the most
beautiful of its objects (for perfect activity seems to be ideally
of this nature; whether we say that it is active, or the organ in
which it resides, may be assumed to be immaterial), it follows that
in the case of each sense the best activity is that of the best-conditioned
organ in relation to the finest of its objects. And this activity
will be the most complete and pleasant. For, while there is pleasure
in respect of any sense, and in respect of thought and contemplation
no less, the most complete is pleasantest, and that of a well-conditioned
organ in relation to the worthiest of its objects is the most complete;
and the pleasure completes the activity. But the pleasure does not
complete it in the same way as the combination of object and sense,
both good, just as health and the doctor are not in the same way the
cause of a man's being healthy. (That pleasure is produced in respect
to each sense is plain; for we speak of sights and sounds as pleasant.
It is also plain that it arises most of all when both the sense is
at its best and it is active in reference to an object which corresponds;
when both object and perceiver are of the best there will always be
pleasure, since the requisite agent and patient are both present.)
Pleasure completes the activity not as the corresponding permanent
state does, by its immanence, but as an end which supervenes as the
bloom of youth does on those in the flower of their age. So long,
then, as both the intelligible or sensible object and the discriminating
or contemplative faculty are as they should be, the pleasure will
be involved in the activity; for when both the passive and the active
factor are unchanged and are related to each other in the same way,
the same result naturally follows. 

How, then, is it that no one is continuously pleased? Is it that we
grow weary? Certainly all human beings are incapable of continuous
activity. Therefore pleasure also is not continuous; for it accompanies
activity. Some things delight us when they are new, but later do so
less, for the same reason; for at first the mind is in a state of
stimulation and intensely active about them, as people are with respect
to their vision when they look hard at a thing, but afterwards our
activity is not of this kind, but has grown relaxed; for which reason
the pleasure also is dulled. 

One might think that all men desire pleasure because they all aim
at life; life is an activity, and each man is active about those things
and with those faculties that he loves most; e.g. the musician is
active with his hearing in reference to tunes, the student with his
mind in reference to theoretical questions, and so on in each case;
now pleasure completes the activities, and therefore life, which they
desire. It is with good reason, then, that they aim at pleasure too,
since for every one it completes life, which is desirable. But whether
we choose life for the sake of pleasure or pleasure for the sake of
life is a question we may dismiss for the present. For they seem to
be bound up together and not to admit of separation, since without
activity pleasure does not arise, and every activity is completed
by the attendant pleasure. 

5 

For this reason pleasures seem, too, to differ in kind. For things
different in kind are, we think, completed by different things (we
see this to be true both of natural objects and of things produced
by art, e.g. animals, trees, a painting, a sculpture, a house, an
implement); and, similarly, we think that activities differing in
kind are completed by things differing in kind. Now the activities
of thought differ from those of the senses, and both differ among
themselves, in kind; so, therefore, do the pleasures that complete
them. 

This may be seen, too, from the fact that each of the pleasures is
bound up with the activity it completes. For an activity is intensified
by its proper pleasure, since each class of things is better judged
of and brought to precision by those who engage in the activity with
pleasure; e.g. it is those who enjoy geometrical thinking that become
geometers and grasp the various propositions better, and, similarly,
those who are fond of music or of building, and so on, make progress
in their proper function by enjoying it; so the pleasures intensify
the activities, and what intensifies a thing is proper to it, but
things different in kind have properties different in kind.

This will be even more apparent from the fact that activities are
hindered by pleasures arising from other sources. For people who are
fond of playing the flute are incapable of attending to arguments
if they overhear some one playing the flute, since they enjoy flute-playing
more than the activity in hand; so the pleasure connected with fluteplaying
destroys the activity concerned with argument. This happens, similarly,
in all other cases, when one is active about two things at once; the
more pleasant activity drives out the other, and if it is much more
pleasant does so all the more, so that one even ceases from the other.
This is why when we enjoy anything very much we do not throw ourselves
into anything else, and do one thing only when we are not much pleased
by another; e.g. in the theatre the people who eat sweets do so most
when the actors are poor. Now since activities are made precise and
more enduring and better by their proper pleasure, and injured by
alien pleasures, evidently the two kinds of pleasure are far apart.
For alien pleasures do pretty much what proper pains do, since activities
are destroyed by their proper pains; e.g. if a man finds writing or
doing sums unpleasant and painful, he does not write, or does not
do sums, because the activity is painful. So an activity suffers contrary
effects from its proper pleasures and pains, i.e. from those that
supervene on it in virtue of its own nature. And alien pleasures have
been stated to do much the same as pain; they destroy the activity,
only not to the same degree. 

Now since activities differ in respect of goodness and badness, and
some are worthy to be chosen, others to be avoided, and others neutral,
so, too, are the pleasures; for to each activity there is a proper
pleasure. The pleasure proper to a worthy activity is good and that
proper to an unworthy activity bad; just as the appetites for noble
objects are laudable, those for base objects culpable. But the pleasures
involved in activities are more proper to them than the desires; for
the latter are separated both in time and in nature, while the former
are close to the activities, and so hard to distinguish from them
that it admits of dispute whether the activity is not the same as
the pleasure. (Still, pleasure does not seem to be thought or perception-that
would be strange; but because they are not found apart they appear
to some people the same.) As activities are different, then, so are
the corresponding pleasures. Now sight is superior to touch in purity,
and hearing and smell to taste; the pleasures, therefore, are similarly
superior, and those of thought superior to these, and within each
of the two kinds some are superior to others. 

Each animal is thought to have a proper pleasure, as it has a proper
function; viz. that which corresponds to its activity. If we survey
them species by species, too, this will be evident; horse, dog, and
man have different pleasures, as Heraclitus says 'asses would prefer
sweepings to gold'; for food is pleasanter than gold to asses. So
the pleasures of creatures different in kind differ in kind, and it
is plausible to suppose that those of a single species do not differ.
But they vary to no small extent, in the case of men at least; the
same things delight some people and pain others, and are painful and
odious to some, and pleasant to and liked by others. This happens,
too, in the case of sweet things; the same things do not seem sweet
to a man in a fever and a healthy man-nor hot to a weak man and one
in good condition. The same happens in other cases. But in all such
matters that which appears to the good man is thought to be really
so. If this is correct, as it seems to be, and virtue and the good
man as such are the measure of each thing, those also will be pleasures
which appear so to him, and those things pleasant which he enjoys.
If the things he finds tiresome seem pleasant to some one, that is
nothing surprising; for men may be ruined and spoilt in many ways;
but the things are not pleasant, but only pleasant to these people
and to people in this condition. Those which are admittedly disgraceful
plainly should not be said to be pleasures, except to a perverted
taste; but of those that are thought to be good what kind of pleasure
or what pleasure should be said to be that proper to man? Is it not
plain from the corresponding activities? The pleasures follow these.
Whether, then, the perfect and supremely happy man has one or more
activities, the pleasures that perfect these will be said in the strict
sense to be pleasures proper to man, and the rest will be so in a
secondary and fractional way, as are the activities. 

6 

Now that we have spoken of the virtues, the forms of friendship, and
the varieties of pleasure, what remains is to discuss in outline the
nature of happiness, since this is what we state the end of human
nature to be. Our discussion will be the more concise if we first
sum up what we have said already. We said, then, that it is not a
disposition; for if it were it might belong to some one who was asleep
throughout his life, living the life of a plant, or, again, to some
one who was suffering the greatest misfortunes. If these implications
are unacceptable, and we must rather class happiness as an activity,
as we have said before, and if some activities are necessary, and
desirable for the sake of something else, while others are so in themselves,
evidently happiness must be placed among those desirable in themselves,
not among those desirable for the sake of something else; for happiness
does not lack anything, but is self-sufficient. Now those activities
are desirable in themselves from which nothing is sought beyond the
activity. And of this nature virtuous actions are thought to be; for
to do noble and good deeds is a thing desirable for its own sake.

Pleasant amusements also are thought to be of this nature; we choose
them not for the sake of other things; for we are injured rather than
benefited by them, since we are led to neglect our bodies and our
property. But most of the people who are deemed happy take refuge
in such pastimes, which is the reason why those who are ready-witted
at them are highly esteemed at the courts of tyrants; they make themselves
pleasant companions in the tyrants' favourite pursuits, and that is
the sort of man they want. Now these things are thought to be of the
nature of happiness because people in despotic positions spend their
leisure in them, but perhaps such people prove nothing; for virtue
and reason, from which good activities flow, do not depend on despotic
position; nor, if these people, who have never tasted pure and generous
pleasure, take refuge in the bodily pleasures, should these for that
reason be thought more desirable; for boys, too, think the things
that are valued among themselves are the best. It is to be expected,
then, that, as different things seem valuable to boys and to men,
so they should to bad men and to good. Now, as we have often maintained,
those things are both valuable and pleasant which are such to the
good man; and to each man the activity in accordance with his own
disposition is most desirable, and, therefore, to the good man that
which is in accordance with virtue. Happiness, therefore, does not
lie in amusement; it would, indeed, be strange if the end were amusement,
and one were to take trouble and suffer hardship all one's life in
order to amuse oneself. For, in a word, everything that we choose
we choose for the sake of something else-except happiness, which is
an end. Now to exert oneself and work for the sake of amusement seems
silly and utterly childish. But to amuse oneself in order that one
may exert oneself, as Anacharsis puts it, seems right; for amusement
is a sort of relaxation, and we need relaxation because we cannot
work continuously. Relaxation, then, is not an end; for it is taken
for the sake of activity. 

The happy life is thought to be virtuous; now a virtuous life requires
exertion, and does not consist in amusement. And we say that serious
things are better than laughable things and those connected with amusement,
and that the activity of the better of any two things-whether it be
two elements of our being or two men-is the more serious; but the
activity of the better is ipso facto superior and more of the nature
of happiness. And any chance person-even a slave-can enjoy the bodily
pleasures no less than the best man; but no one assigns to a slave
a share in happiness-unless he assigns to him also a share in human
life. For happiness does not lie in such occupations, but, as we have
said before, in virtuous activities. 

7 

If happiness is activity in accordance with virtue, it is reasonable
that it should be in accordance with the highest virtue; and this
will be that of the best thing in us. Whether it be reason or something
else that is this element which is thought to be our natural ruler
and guide and to take thought of things noble and divine, whether
it be itself also divine or only the most divine element in us, the
activity of this in accordance with its proper virtue will be perfect
happiness. That this activity is contemplative we have already said.

Now this would seem to be in agreement both with what we said before
and with the truth. For, firstly, this activity is the best (since
not only is reason the best thing in us, but the objects of reason
are the best of knowable objects); and secondly, it is the most continuous,
since we can contemplate truth more continuously than we can do anything.
And we think happiness has pleasure mingled with it, but the activity
of philosophic wisdom is admittedly the pleasantest of virtuous activities;
at all events the pursuit of it is thought to offer pleasures marvellous
for their purity and their enduringness, and it is to be expected
that those who know will pass their time more pleasantly than those
who inquire. And the self-sufficiency that is spoken of must belong
most to the contemplative activity. For while a philosopher, as well
as a just man or one possessing any other virtue, needs the necessaries
of life, when they are sufficiently equipped with things of that sort
the just man needs people towards whom and with whom he shall act
justly, and the temperate man, the brave man, and each of the others
is in the same case, but the philosopher, even when by himself, can
contemplate truth, and the better the wiser he is; he can perhaps
do so better if he has fellow-workers, but still he is the most self-sufficient.
And this activity alone would seem to be loved for its own sake; for
nothing arises from it apart from the contemplating, while from practical
activities we gain more or less apart from the action. And happiness
is thought to depend on leisure; for we are busy that we may have
leisure, and make war that we may live in peace. Now the activity
of the practical virtues is exhibited in political or military affairs,
but the actions concerned with these seem to be unleisurely. Warlike
actions are completely so (for no one chooses to be at war, or provokes
war, for the sake of being at war; any one would seem absolutely murderous
if he were to make enemies of his friends in order to bring about
battle and slaughter); but the action of the statesman is also unleisurely,
and-apart from the political action itself-aims at despotic power
and honours, or at all events happiness, for him and his fellow citizens-a
happiness different from political action, and evidently sought as
being different. So if among virtuous actions political and military
actions are distinguished by nobility and greatness, and these are
unleisurely and aim at an end and are not desirable for their own
sake, but the activity of reason, which is contemplative, seems both
to be superior in serious worth and to aim at no end beyond itself,
and to have its pleasure proper to itself (and this augments the activity),
and the self-sufficiency, leisureliness, unweariedness (so far as
this is possible for man), and all the other attributes ascribed to
the supremely happy man are evidently those connected with this activity,
it follows that this will be the complete happiness of man, if it
be allowed a complete term of life (for none of the attributes of
happiness is incomplete). 

But such a life would be too high for man; for it is not in so far
as he is man that he will live so, but in so far as something divine
is present in him; and by so much as this is superior to our composite
nature is its activity superior to that which is the exercise of the
other kind of virtue. If reason is divine, then, in comparison with
man, the life according to it is divine in comparison with human life.
But we must not follow those who advise us, being men, to think of
human things, and, being mortal, of mortal things, but must, so far
as we can, make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live
in accordance with the best thing in us; for even if it be small in
bulk, much more does it in power and worth surpass everything. This
would seem, too, to be each man himself, since it is the authoritative
and better part of him. It would be strange, then, if he were to choose
not the life of his self but that of something else. And what we said
before' will apply now; that which is proper to each thing is by nature
best and most pleasant for each thing; for man, therefore, the life
according to reason is best and pleasantest, since reason more than
anything else is man. This life therefore is also the happiest.

8 

But in a secondary degree the life in accordance with the other kind
of virtue is happy; for the activities in accordance with this befit
our human estate. Just and brave acts, and other virtuous acts, we
do in relation to each other, observing our respective duties with
regard to contracts and services and all manner of actions and with
regard to passions; and all of these seem to be typically human. Some
of them seem even to arise from the body, and virtue of character
to be in many ways bound up with the passions. Practical wisdom, too,
is linked to virtue of character, and this to practical wisdom, since
the principles of practical wisdom are in accordance with the moral
virtues and rightness in morals is in accordance with practical wisdom.
Being connected with the passions also, the moral virtues must belong
to our composite nature; and the virtues of our composite nature are
human; so, therefore, are the life and the happiness which correspond
to these. The excellence of the reason is a thing apart; we must be
content to say this much about it, for to describe it precisely is
a task greater than our purpose requires. It would seem, however,
also to need external equipment but little, or less than moral virtue
does. Grant that both need the necessaries, and do so equally, even
if the statesman's work is the more concerned with the body and things
of that sort; for there will be little difference there; but in what
they need for the exercise of their activities there will be much
difference. The liberal man will need money for the doing of his liberal
deeds, and the just man too will need it for the returning of services
(for wishes are hard to discern, and even people who are not just
pretend to wish to act justly); and the brave man will need power
if he is to accomplish any of the acts that correspond to his virtue,
and the temperate man will need opportunity; for how else is either
he or any of the others to be recognized? It is debated, too, whether
the will or the deed is more essential to virtue, which is assumed
to involve both; it is surely clear that its perfection involves both;
but for deeds many things are needed, and more, the greater and nobler
the deeds are. But the man who is contemplating the truth needs no
such thing, at least with a view to the exercise of his activity;
indeed they are, one may say, even hindrances, at all events to his
contemplation; but in so far as he is a man and lives with a number
of people, he chooses to do virtuous acts; he will therefore need
such aids to living a human life. 

But that perfect happiness is a contemplative activity will appear
from the following consideration as well. We assume the gods to be
above all other beings blessed and happy; but what sort of actions
must we assign to them? Acts of justice? Will not the gods seem absurd
if they make contracts and return deposits, and so on? Acts of a brave
man, then, confronting dangers and running risks because it is noble
to do so? Or liberal acts? To whom will they give? It will be strange
if they are really to have money or anything of the kind. And what
would their temperate acts be? Is not such praise tasteless, since
they have no bad appetites? If we were to run through them all, the
circumstances of action would be found trivial and unworthy of gods.
Still, every one supposes that they live and therefore that they are
active; we cannot suppose them to sleep like Endymion. Now if you
take away from a living being action, and still more production, what
is left but contemplation? Therefore the activity of God, which surpasses
all others in blessedness, must be contemplative; and of human activities,
therefore, that which is most akin to this must be most of the nature
of happiness. 

This is indicated, too, by the fact that the other animals have no
share in happiness, being completely deprived of such activity. For
while the whole life of the gods is blessed, and that of men too in
so far as some likeness of such activity belongs to them, none of
the other animals is happy, since they in no way share in contemplation.
Happiness extends, then, just so far as contemplation does, and those
to whom contemplation more fully belongs are more truly happy, not
as a mere concomitant but in virtue of the contemplation; for this
is in itself precious. Happiness, therefore, must be some form of
contemplation. 

But, being a man, one will also need external prosperity; for our
nature is not self-sufficient for the purpose of contemplation, but
our body also must be healthy and must have food and other attention.
Still, we must not think that the man who is to be happy will need
many things or great things, merely because he cannot be supremely
happy without external goods; for self-sufficiency and action do not
involve excess, and we can do noble acts without ruling earth and
sea; for even with moderate advantages one can act virtuously (this
is manifest enough; for private persons are thought to do worthy acts
no less than despots-indeed even more); and it is enough that we should
have so much as that; for the life of the man who is active in accordance
with virtue will be happy. Solon, too, was perhaps sketching well
the happy man when he described him as moderately furnished with externals
but as having done (as Solon thought) the noblest acts, and lived
temperately; for one can with but moderate possessions do what one
ought. Anaxagoras also seems to have supposed the happy man not to
be rich nor a despot, when he said that he would not be surprised
if the happy man were to seem to most people a strange person; for
they judge by externals, since these are all they perceive. The opinions
of the wise seem, then, to harmonize with our arguments. But while
even such things carry some conviction, the truth in practical matters
is discerned from the facts of life; for these are the decisive factor.
We must therefore survey what we have already said, bringing it to
the test of the facts of life, and if it harmonizes with the facts
we must accept it, but if it clashes with them we must suppose it
to be mere theory. Now he who exercises his reason and cultivates
it seems to be both in the best state of mind and most dear to the
gods. For if the gods have any care for human affairs, as they are
thought to have, it would be reasonable both that they should delight
in that which was best and most akin to them (i.e. reason) and that
they should reward those who love and honour this most, as caring
for the things that are dear to them and acting both rightly and nobly.
And that all these attributes belong most of all to the philosopher
is manifest. He, therefore, is the dearest to the gods. And he who
is that will presumably be also the happiest; so that in this way
too the philosopher will more than any other be happy. 

9 

If these matters and the virtues, and also friendship and pleasure,
have been dealt with sufficiently in outline, are we to suppose that
our programme has reached its end? Surely, as the saying goes, where
there are things to be done the end is not to survey and recognize
the various things, but rather to do them; with regard to virtue,
then, it is not enough to know, but we must try to have and use it,
or try any other way there may be of becoming good. Now if arguments
were in themselves enough to make men good, they would justly, as
Theognis says, have won very great rewards, and such rewards should
have been provided; but as things are, while they seem to have power
to encourage and stimulate the generous-minded among our youth, and
to make a character which is gently born, and a true lover of what
is noble, ready to be possessed by virtue, they are not able to encourage
the many to nobility and goodness. For these do not by nature obey
the sense of shame, but only fear, and do not abstain from bad acts
because of their baseness but through fear of punishment; living by
passion they pursue their own pleasures and the means to them, and
and the opposite pains, and have not even a conception of what is
noble and truly pleasant, since they have never tasted it. What argument
would remould such people? It is hard, if not impossible, to remove
by argument the traits that have long since been incorporated in the
character; and perhaps we must be content if, when all the influences
by which we are thought to become good are present, we get some tincture
of virtue. 

Now some think that we are made good by nature, others by habituation,
others by teaching. Nature's part evidently does not depend on us,
but as a result of some divine causes is present in those who are
truly fortunate; while argument and teaching, we may suspect, are
not powerful with all men, but the soul of the student must first
have been cultivated by means of habits for noble joy and noble hatred,
like earth which is to nourish the seed. For he who lives as passion
directs will not hear argument that dissuades him, nor understand
it if he does; and how can we persuade one in such a state to change
his ways? And in general passion seems to yield not to argument but
to force. The character, then, must somehow be there already with
a kinship to virtue, loving what is noble and hating what is base.

But it is difficult to get from youth up a right training for virtue
if one has not been brought up under right laws; for to live temperately
and hardily is not pleasant to most people, especially when they are
young. For this reason their nurture and occupations should be fixed
by law; for they will not be painful when they have become customary.
But it is surely not enough that when they are young they should get
the right nurture and attention; since they must, even when they are
grown up, practise and be habituated to them, we shall need laws for
this as well, and generally speaking to cover the whole of life; for
most people obey necessity rather than argument, and punishments rather
than the sense of what is noble. 

This is why some think that legislators ought to stimulate men to
virtue and urge them forward by the motive of the noble, on the assumption
that those who have been well advanced by the formation of habits
will attend to such influences; and that punishments and penalties
should be imposed on those who disobey and are of inferior nature,
while the incurably bad should be completely banished. A good man
(they think), since he lives with his mind fixed on what is noble,
will submit to argument, while a bad man, whose desire is for pleasure,
is corrected by pain like a beast of burden. This is, too, why they
say the pains inflicted should be those that are most opposed to the
pleasures such men love. 

However that may be, if (as we have said) the man who is to be good
must be well trained and habituated, and go on to spend his time in
worthy occupations and neither willingly nor unwillingly do bad actions,
and if this can be brought about if men live in accordance with a
sort of reason and right order, provided this has force,-if this be
so, the paternal command indeed has not the required force or compulsive
power (nor in general has the command of one man, unless he be a king
or something similar), but the law has compulsive power, while it
is at the same time a rule proceeding from a sort of practical wisdom
and reason. And while people hate men who oppose their impulses, even
if they oppose them rightly, the law in its ordaining of what is good
is not burdensome. 

In the Spartan state alone, or almost alone, the legislator seems
to have paid attention to questions of nurture and occupations; in
most states such matters have been neglected, and each man lives as
he pleases, Cyclops-fashion, 'to his own wife and children dealing
law'. Now it is best that there should be a public and proper care
for such matters; but if they are neglected by the community it would
seem right for each man to help his children and friends towards virtue,
and that they should have the power, or at least the will, to do this.

It would seem from what has been said that he can do this better if
he makes himself capable of legislating. For public control is plainly
effected by laws, and good control by good laws; whether written or
unwritten would seem to make no difference, nor whether they are laws
providing for the education of individuals or of groups-any more than
it does in the case of music or gymnastics and other such pursuits.
For as in cities laws and prevailing types of character have force,
so in households do the injunctions and the habits of the father,
and these have even more because of the tie of blood and the benefits
he confers; for the children start with a natural affection and disposition
to obey. Further, private education has an advantage over public,
as private medical treatment has; for while in general rest and abstinence
from food are good for a man in a fever, for a particular man they
may not be; and a boxer presumably does not prescribe the same style
of fighting to all his pupils. It would seem, then, that the detail
is worked out with more precision if the control is private; for each
person is more likely to get what suits his case. 

But the details can be best looked after, one by one, by a doctor
or gymnastic instructor or any one else who has the general knowledge
of what is good for every one or for people of a certain kind (for
the sciences both are said to be, and are, concerned with what is
universal); not but what some particular detail may perhaps be well
looked after by an unscientific person, if he has studied accurately
in the light of experience what happens in each case, just as some
people seem to be their own best doctors, though they could give no
help to any one else. None the less, it will perhaps be agreed that
if a man does wish to become master of an art or science he must go
to the universal, and come to know it as well as possible; for, as
we have said, it is with this that the sciences are concerned.

And surely he who wants to make men, whether many or few, better by
his care must try to become capable of legislating, if it is through
laws that we can become good. For to get any one whatever-any one
who is put before us-into the right condition is not for the first
chance comer; if any one can do it, it is the man who knows, just
as in medicine and all other matters which give scope for care and
prudence. 

Must we not, then, next examine whence or how one can learn how to
legislate? Is it, as in all other cases, from statesmen? Certainly
it was thought to be a part of statesmanship. Or is a difference apparent
between statesmanship and the other sciences and arts? In the others
the same people are found offering to teach the arts and practising
them, e.g. doctors or painters; but while the sophists profess to
teach politics, it is practised not by any of them but by the politicians,
who would seem to do so by dint of a certain skill and experience
rather than of thought; for they are not found either writing or speaking
about such matters (though it were a nobler occupation perhaps than
composing speeches for the law-courts and the assembly), nor again
are they found to have made statesmen of their own sons or any other
of their friends. But it was to be expected that they should if they
could; for there is nothing better than such a skill that they could
have left to their cities, or could prefer to have for themselves,
or, therefore, for those dearest to them. Still, experience seems
to contribute not a little; else they could not have become politicians
by familiarity with politics; and so it seems that those who aim at
knowing about the art of politics need experience as well.

But those of the sophists who profess the art seem to be very far
from teaching it. For, to put the matter generally, they do not even
know what kind of thing it is nor what kinds of things it is about;
otherwise they would not have classed it as identical with rhetoric
or even inferior to it, nor have thought it easy to legislate by collecting
the laws that are thought well of; they say it is possible to select
the best laws, as though even the selection did not demand intelligence
and as though right judgement were not the greatest thing, as in matters
of music. For while people experienced in any department judge rightly
the works produced in it, and understand by what means or how they
are achieved, and what harmonizes with what, the inexperienced must
be content if they do not fail to see whether the work has been well
or ill made-as in the case of painting. Now laws are as it were the'
works' of the political art; how then can one learn from them to be
a legislator, or judge which are best? Even medical men do not seem
to be made by a study of text-books. Yet people try, at any rate,
to state not only the treatments, but also how particular classes
of people can be cured and should be treated-distinguishing the various
habits of body; but while this seems useful to experienced people,
to the inexperienced it is valueless. Surely, then, while collections
of laws, and of constitutions also, may be serviceable to those who
can study them and judge what is good or bad and what enactments suit
what circumstances, those who go through such collections without
a practised faculty will not have right judgement (unless it be as
a spontaneous gift of nature), though they may perhaps become more
intelligent in such matters. 

Now our predecessors have left the subject of legislation to us unexamined;
it is perhaps best, therefore, that we should ourselves study it,
and in general study the question of the constitution, in order to
complete to the best of our ability our philosophy of human nature.
First, then, if anything has been said well in detail by earlier thinkers,
let us try to review it; then in the light of the constitutions we
have collected let us study what sorts of influence preserve and destroy
states, and what sorts preserve or destroy the particular kinds of
constitution, and to what causes it is due that some are well and
others ill administered. When these have been studied we shall perhaps
be more likely to see with a comprehensive view, which constitution
is best, and how each must be ordered, and what laws and customs it
must use, if it is to be at its best. Let us make a beginning of our
discussion. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

When the objects of an inquiry, in any department, have principles,
conditions, or elements, it is through acquaintance with these that
knowledge, that is to say scientific knowledge, is attained. For we
do not think that we know a thing until we are acquainted with its
primary conditions or first principles, and have carried our analysis
as far as its simplest elements. Plainly therefore in the science
of Nature, as in other branches of study, our first task will be to
try to determine what relates to its principles. 

The natural way of doing this is to start from the things which are
more knowable and obvious to us and proceed towards those which are
clearer and more knowable by nature; for the same things are not 'knowable
relatively to us' and 'knowable' without qualification. So in the
present inquiry we must follow this method and advance from what is
more obscure by nature, but clearer to us, towards what is more clear
and more knowable by nature. 

Now what is to us plain and obvious at first is rather confused masses,
the elements and principles of which become known to us later by analysis.
Thus we must advance from generalities to particulars; for it is a
whole that is best known to sense-perception, and a generality is
a kind of whole, comprehending many things within it, like parts.
Much the same thing happens in the relation of the name to the formula.
A name, e.g. 'round', means vaguely a sort of whole: its definition
analyses this into its particular senses. Similarly a child begins
by calling all men 'father', and all women 'mother', but later on
distinguishes each of them. 

Part 2

The principles in question must be either (a) one or (b) more than
one. If (a) one, it must be either (i) motionless, as Parmenides and
Melissus assert, or (ii) in motion, as the physicists hold, some declaring
air to be the first principle, others water. If (b) more than one,
then either (i) a finite or (ii) an infinite plurality. If (i) finite
(but more than one), then either two or three or four or some other
number. If (ii) infinite, then either as Democritus believed one in
kind, but differing in shape or form; or different in kind and even
contrary. 

A similar inquiry is made by those who inquire into the number of
existents: for they inquire whether the ultimate constituents of existing
things are one or many, and if many, whether a finite or an infinite
plurality. So they too are inquiring whether the principle or element
is one or many. 

Now to investigate whether Being is one and motionless is not a contribution
to the science of Nature. For just as the geometer has nothing more
to say to one who denies the principles of his science-this being
a question for a different science or for or common to all-so a man
investigating principles cannot argue with one who denies their existence.
For if Being is just one, and one in the way mentioned, there is a
principle no longer, since a principle must be the principle of some
thing or things. 

To inquire therefore whether Being is one in this sense would be like
arguing against any other position maintained for the sake of argument
(such as the Heraclitean thesis, or such a thesis as that Being is
one man) or like refuting a merely contentious argument-a description
which applies to the arguments both of Melissus and of Parmenides:
their premisses are false and their conclusions do not follow. Or
rather the argument of Melissus is gross and palpable and offers no
difficulty at all: accept one ridiculous proposition and the rest
follows-a simple enough proceeding. 

We physicists, on the other hand, must take for granted that the things
that exist by nature are, either all or some of them, in motion which
is indeed made plain by induction. Moreover, no man of science is
bound to solve every kind of difficulty that may be raised, but only
as many as are drawn falsely from the principles of the science: it
is not our business to refute those that do not arise in this way:
just as it is the duty of the geometer to refute the squaring of the
circle by means of segments, but it is not his duty to refute Antiphon's
proof. At the same time the holders of the theory of which we are
speaking do incidentally raise physical questions, though Nature is
not their subject: so it will perhaps be as well to spend a few words
on them, especially as the inquiry is not without scientific interest.

The most pertinent question with which to begin will be this: In what
sense is it asserted that all things are one? For 'is' is used in
many senses. Do they mean that all things 'are' substance or quantities
or qualities? And, further, are all things one substance-one man,
one horse, or one soul-or quality and that one and the same-white
or hot or something of the kind? These are all very different doctrines
and all impossible to maintain. 

For if both substance and quantity and quality are, then, whether
these exist independently of each other or not, Being will be many.

If on the other hand it is asserted that all things are quality or
quantity, then, whether substance exists or not, an absurdity results,
if the impossible can properly be called absurd. For none of the others
can exist independently: substance alone is independent: for everything
is predicated of substance as subject. Now Melissus says that Being
is infinite. It is then a quantity. For the infinite is in the category
of quantity, whereas substance or quality or affection cannot be infinite
except through a concomitant attribute, that is, if at the same time
they are also quantities. For to define the infinite you must use
quantity in your formula, but not substance or quality. If then Being
is both substance and quantity, it is two, not one: if only substance,
it is not infinite and has no magnitude; for to have that it will
have to be a quantity. 

Again, 'one' itself, no less than 'being', is used in many senses,
so we must consider in what sense the word is used when it is said
that the All is one. 

Now we say that (a) the continuous is one or that (b) the indivisible
is one, or (c) things are said to be 'one', when their essence is
one and the same, as 'liquor' and 'drink'. 

If (a) their One is one in the sense of continuous, it is many, for
the continuous is divisible ad infinitum. 

There is, indeed, a difficulty about part and whole, perhaps not relevant
to the present argument, yet deserving consideration on its own account-namely,
whether the part and the whole are one or more than one, and how they
can be one or many, and, if they are more than one, in what sense
they are more than one. (Similarly with the parts of wholes which
are not continuous.) Further, if each of the two parts is indivisibly
one with the whole, the difficulty arises that they will be indivisibly
one with each other also. 

But to proceed: If (b) their One is one as indivisible, nothing will
have quantity or quality, and so the one will not be infinite, as
Melissus says-nor, indeed, limited, as Parmenides says, for though
the limit is indivisible, the limited is not. 

But if (c) all things are one in the sense of having the same definition,
like 'raiment' and 'dress', then it turns out that they are maintaining
the Heraclitean doctrine, for it will be the same thing 'to be good'
and 'to be bad', and 'to be good' and 'to be not good', and so the
same thing will be 'good' and 'not good', and man and horse; in fact,
their view will be, not that all things are one, but that they are
nothing; and that 'to be of such-and-such a quality' is the same as
'to be of such-and-such a size'. 

Even the more recent of the ancient thinkers were in a pother lest
the same thing should turn out in their hands both one and many. So
some, like Lycophron, were led to omit 'is', others to change the
mode of expression and say 'the man has been whitened' instead of
'is white', and 'walks' instead of 'is walking', for fear that if
they added the word 'is' they should be making the one to be many-as
if 'one' and 'being' were always used in one and the same sense. What
'is' may be many either in definition (for example 'to be white' is
one thing, 'to be musical' another, yet the same thing be both, so
the one is many) or by division, as the whole and its parts. On this
point, indeed, they were already getting into difficulties and admitted
that the one was many-as if there was any difficulty about the same
thing being both one and many, provided that these are not opposites;
for 'one' may mean either 'potentially one' or 'actually one'.

Part 3

If, then, we approach the thesis in this way it seems impossible for
all things to be one. Further, the arguments they use to prove their
position are not difficult to expose. For both of them reason contentiously-I
mean both Melissus and Parmenides. [Their premisses are false and
their conclusions do not follow. Or rather the argument of Melissus
is gross and palpable and offers no difficulty at all: admit one ridiculous
proposition and the rest follows-a simple enough proceeding.] The
fallacy of Melissus is obvious. For he supposes that the assumption
'what has come into being always has a beginning' justifies the assumption
'what has not come into being has no beginning'. Then this also is
absurd, that in every case there should be a beginning of the thing-not
of the time and not only in the case of coming to be in the full sense
but also in the case of coming to have a quality-as if change never
took place suddenly. Again, does it follow that Being, if one, is
motionless? Why should it not move, the whole of it within itself,
as parts of it do which are unities, e.g. this water? Again, why is
qualitative change impossible? But, further, Being cannot be one in
form, though it may be in what it is made of. (Even some of the physicists
hold it to be one in the latter way, though not in the former.) Man
obviously differs from horse in form, and contraries from each other.

The same kind of argument holds good against Parmenides also, besides
any that may apply specially to his view: the answer to him being
that 'this is not true' and 'that does not follow'. His assumption
that one is used in a single sense only is false, because it is used
in several. His conclusion does not follow, because if we take only
white things, and if 'white' has a single meaning, none the less what
is white will be many and not one. For what is white will not be one
either in the sense that it is continuous or in the sense that it
must be defined in only one way. 'Whiteness' will be different from
'what has whiteness'. Nor does this mean that there is anything that
can exist separately, over and above what is white. For 'whiteness'
and 'that which is white' differ in definition, not in the sense that
they are things which can exist apart from each other. But Parmenides
had not come in sight of this distinction. 

It is necessary for him, then, to assume not only that 'being' has
the same meaning, of whatever it is predicated, but further that it
means (1) what just is and (2) what is just one. 

It must be so, for (1) an attribute is predicated of some subject,
so that the subject to which 'being' is attributed will not be, as
it is something different from 'being'. Something, therefore, which
is not will be. Hence 'substance' will not be a predicate of anything
else. For the subject cannot be a being, unless 'being' means several
things, in such a way that each is something. But ex hypothesi 'being'
means only one thing. 

If, then, 'substance' is not attributed to anything, but other things
are attributed to it, how does 'substance' mean what is rather than
what is not? For suppose that 'substance' is also 'white'. Since the
definition of the latter is different (for being cannot even be attributed
to white, as nothing is which is not 'substance'), it follows that
'white' is not-being--and that not in the sense of a particular not-being,
but in the sense that it is not at all. Hence 'substance' is not;
for it is true to say that it is white, which we found to mean not-being.
If to avoid this we say that even 'white' means substance, it follows
that 'being' has more than one meaning. 

In particular, then, Being will not have magnitude, if it is substance.
For each of the two parts must he in a different sense. 

(2) Substance is plainly divisible into other substances, if we consider
the mere nature of a definition. For instance, if 'man' is a substance,
'animal' and 'biped' must also be substances. For if not substances,
they must be attributes-and if attributes, attributes either of (a)
man or of (b) some other subject. But neither is possible.

(a) An attribute is either that which may or may not belong to the
subject or that in whose definition the subject of which it is an
attribute is involved. Thus 'sitting' is an example of a separable
attribute, while 'snubness' contains the definition of 'nose', to
which we attribute snubness. Further, the definition of the whole
is not contained in the definitions of the contents or elements of
the definitory formula; that of 'man' for instance in 'biped', or
that of 'white man' in 'white'. If then this is so, and if 'biped'
is supposed to be an attribute of 'man', it must be either separable,
so that 'man' might possibly not be 'biped', or the definition of
'man' must come into the definition of 'biped'-which is impossible,
as the converse is the case. 

(b) If, on the other hand, we suppose that 'biped' and 'animal' are
attributes not of man but of something else, and are not each of them
a substance, then 'man' too will be an attribute of something else.
But we must assume that substance is not the attribute of anything,
that the subject of which both 'biped' and 'animal' and each separately
are predicated is the subject also of the complex 'biped animal'.

Are we then to say that the All is composed of indivisible substances?
Some thinkers did, in point of fact, give way to both arguments. To
the argument that all things are one if being means one thing, they
conceded that not-being is; to that from bisection, they yielded by
positing atomic magnitudes. But obviously it is not true that if being
means one thing, and cannot at the same time mean the contradictory
of this, there will be nothing which is not, for even if what is not
cannot be without qualification, there is no reason why it should
not be a particular not-being. To say that all things will be one,
if there is nothing besides Being itself, is absurd. For who understands
'being itself' to be anything but a particular substance? But if this
is so, there is nothing to prevent there being many beings, as has
been said. 

It is, then, clearly impossible for Being to be one in this sense.

Part 4

The physicists on the other hand have two modes of explanation.

The first set make the underlying body one either one of the three
or something else which is denser than fire and rarer than air then
generate everything else from this, and obtain multiplicity by condensation
and rarefaction. Now these are contraries, which may be generalized
into 'excess and defect'. (Compare Plato's 'Great and Small'-except
that he make these his matter, the one his form, while the others
treat the one which underlies as matter and the contraries as differentiae,
i.e. forms). 

The second set assert that the contrarieties are contained in the
one and emerge from it by segregation, for example Anaximander and
also all those who assert that 'what is' is one and many, like Empedocles
and Anaxagoras; for they too produce other things from their mixture
by segregation. These differ, however, from each other in that the
former imagines a cycle of such changes, the latter a single series.
Anaxagoras again made both his 'homceomerous' substances and his contraries
infinite in multitude, whereas Empedocles posits only the so-called
elements. 

The theory of Anaxagoras that the principles are infinite in multitude
was probably due to his acceptance of the common opinion of the physicists
that nothing comes into being from not-being. For this is the reason
why they use the phrase 'all things were together' and the coming
into being of such and such a kind of thing is reduced to change of
quality, while some spoke of combination and separation. Moreover,
the fact that the contraries proceed from each other led them to the
conclusion. The one, they reasoned, must have already existed in the
other; for since everything that comes into being must arise either
from what is or from what is not, and it is impossible for it to arise
from what is not (on this point all the physicists agree), they thought
that the truth of the alternative necessarily followed, namely that
things come into being out of existent things, i.e. out of things
already present, but imperceptible to our senses because of the smallness
of their bulk. So they assert that everything has been mixed in every.
thing, because they saw everything arising out of everything. But
things, as they say, appear different from one another and receive
different names according to the nature of the particles which are
numerically predominant among the innumerable constituents of the
mixture. For nothing, they say, is purely and entirely white or black
or sweet, bone or flesh, but the nature of a thing is held to be that
of which it contains the most. 

Now (1) the infinite qua infinite is unknowable, so that what is infinite
in multitude or size is unknowable in quantity, and what is infinite
in variety of kind is unknowable in quality. But the principles in
question are infinite both in multitude and in kind. Therefore it
is impossible to know things which are composed of them; for it is
when we know the nature and quantity of its components that we suppose
we know a complex. 

Further (2) if the parts of a whole may be of any size in the direction
either of greatness or of smallness (by 'parts' I mean components
into which a whole can be divided and which are actually present in
it), it is necessary that the whole thing itself may be of any size.
Clearly, therefore, since it is impossible for an animal or plant
to be indefinitely big or small, neither can its parts be such, or
the whole will be the same. But flesh, bone, and the like are the
parts of animals, and the fruits are the parts of plants. Hence it
is obvious that neither flesh, bone, nor any such thing can be of
indefinite size in the direction either of the greater or of the less.

Again (3) according to the theory all such things are already present
in one another and do not come into being but are constituents which
are separated out, and a thing receives its designation from its chief
constituent. Further, anything may come out of anything-water by segregation
from flesh and flesh from water. Hence, since every finite body is
exhausted by the repeated abstraction of a finite body, it seems obviously
to follow that everything cannot subsist in everything else. For let
flesh be extracted from water and again more flesh be produced from
the remainder by repeating the process of separation: then, even though
the quantity separated out will continually decrease, still it will
not fall below a certain magnitude. If, therefore, the process comes
to an end, everything will not be in everything else (for there will
be no flesh in the remaining water); if on the other hand it does
not, and further extraction is always possible, there will be an infinite
multitude of finite equal particles in a finite quantity-which is
impossible. Another proof may be added: Since every body must diminish
in size when something is taken from it, and flesh is quantitatively
definite in respect both of greatness and smallness, it is clear that
from the minimum quantity of flesh no body can be separated out; for
the flesh left would be less than the minimum of flesh. 

Lastly (4) in each of his infinite bodies there would be already present
infinite flesh and blood and brain- having a distinct existence, however,
from one another, and no less real than the infinite bodies, and each
infinite: which is contrary to reason. 

The statement that complete separation never will take place is correct
enough, though Anaxagoras is not fully aware of what it means. For
affections are indeed inseparable. If then colours and states had
entered into the mixture, and if separation took place, there would
be a 'white' or a 'healthy' which was nothing but white or healthy,
i.e. was not the predicate of a subject. So his 'Mind' is an absurd
person aiming at the impossible, if he is supposed to wish to separate
them, and it is impossible to do so, both in respect of quantity and
of quality- of quantity, because there is no minimum magnitude, and
of quality, because affections are inseparable. 

Nor is Anaxagoras right about the coming to be of homogeneous bodies.
It is true there is a sense in which clay is divided into pieces of
clay, but there is another in which it is not. Water and air are,
and are generated 'from' each other, but not in the way in which bricks
come 'from' a house and again a house 'from' bricks; and it is better
to assume a smaller and finite number of principles, as Empedocles
does. 

Part 5

All thinkers then agree in making the contraries principles, both
those who describe the All as one and unmoved (for even Parmenides
treats hot and cold as principles under the names of fire and earth)
and those too who use the rare and the dense. The same is true of
Democritus also, with his plenum and void, both of which exist, be
says, the one as being, the other as not-being. Again he speaks of
differences in position, shape, and order, and these are genera of
which the species are contraries, namely, of position, above and below,
before and behind; of shape, angular and angle-less, straight and
round. 

It is plain then that they all in one way or another identify the
contraries with the principles. And with good reason. For first principles
must not be derived from one another nor from anything else, while
everything has to be derived from them. But these conditions are fulfilled
by the primary contraries, which are not derived from anything else
because they are primary, nor from each other because they are contraries.

But we must see how this can be arrived at as a reasoned result, as
well as in the way just indicated. 

Our first presupposition must be that in nature nothing acts on, or
is acted on by, any other thing at random, nor may anything come from
anything else, unless we mean that it does so in virtue of a concomitant
attribute. For how could 'white' come from 'musical', unless 'musical'
happened to be an attribute of the not-white or of the black? No,
'white' comes from 'not-white'-and not from any 'not-white', but from
black or some intermediate colour. Similarly, 'musical' comes to be
from 'not-musical', but not from any thing other than musical, but
from 'unmusical' or any intermediate state there may be.

Nor again do things pass into the first chance thing; 'white' does
not pass into 'musical' (except, it may be, in virtue of a concomitant
attribute), but into 'not-white'-and not into any chance thing which
is not white, but into black or an intermediate colour; 'musical'
passes into 'not-musical'-and not into any chance thing other than
musical, but into 'unmusical' or any intermediate state there may
be. 

The same holds of other things also: even things which are not simple
but complex follow the same principle, but the opposite state has
not received a name, so we fail to notice the fact. What is in tune
must come from what is not in tune, and vice versa; the tuned passes
into untunedness-and not into any untunedness, but into the corresponding
opposite. It does not matter whether we take attunement, order, or
composition for our illustration; the principle is obviously the same
in all, and in fact applies equally to the production of a house,
a statue, or any other complex. A house comes from certain things
in a certain state of separation instead of conjunction, a statue
(or any other thing that has been shaped) from shapelessness-each
of these objects being partly order and partly composition.

If then this is true, everything that comes to be or passes away from,
or passes into, its contrary or an intermediate state. But the intermediates
are derived from the contraries-colours, for instance, from black
and white. Everything, therefore, that comes to be by a natural process
is either a contrary or a product of contraries. 

Up to this point we have practically had most of the other writers
on the subject with us, as I have said already: for all of them identify
their elements, and what they call their principles, with the contraries,
giving no reason indeed for the theory, but contrained as it were
by the truth itself. They differ, however, from one another in that
some assume contraries which are more primary, others contraries which
are less so: some those more knowable in the order of explanation,
others those more familiar to sense. For some make hot and cold, or
again moist and dry, the conditions of becoming; while others make
odd and even, or again Love and Strife; and these differ from each
other in the way mentioned. 

Hence their principles are in one sense the same, in another different;
different certainly, as indeed most people think, but the same inasmuch
as they are analogous; for all are taken from the same table of columns,
some of the pairs being wider, others narrower in extent. In this
way then their theories are both the same and different, some better,
some worse; some, as I have said, take as their contraries what is
more knowable in the order of explanation, others what is more familiar
to sense. (The universal is more knowable in the order of explanation,
the particular in the order of sense: for explanation has to do with
the universal, sense with the particular.) 'The great and the small',
for example, belong to the former class, 'the dense and the rare'
to the latter. 

It is clear then that our principles must be contraries.

Part 6

The next question is whether the principles are two or three or more
in number. 

One they cannot be, for there cannot be one contrary. Nor can they
be innumerable, because, if so, Being will not be knowable: and in
any one genus there is only one contrariety, and substance is one
genus: also a finite number is sufficient, and a finite number, such
as the principles of Empedocles, is better than an infinite multitude;
for Empedocles professes to obtain from his principles all that Anaxagoras
obtains from his innumerable principles. Lastly, some contraries are
more primary than others, and some arise from others-for example sweet
and bitter, white and black-whereas the principles must always remain
principles. 

This will suffice to show that the principles are neither one nor
innumerable. 

Granted, then, that they are a limited number, it is plausible to
suppose them more than two. For it is difficult to see how either
density should be of such a nature as to act in any way on rarity
or rarity on density. The same is true of any other pair of contraries;
for Love does not gather Strife together and make things out of it,
nor does Strife make anything out of Love, but both act on a third
thing different from both. Some indeed assume more than one such thing
from which they construct the world of nature. 

Other objections to the view that it is not necessary to assume a
third principle as a substratum may be added. (1) We do not find that
the contraries constitute the substance of any thing. But what is
a first principle ought not to be the predicate of any subject. If
it were, there would be a principle of the supposed principle: for
the subject is a principle, and prior presumably to what is predicated
of it. Again (2) we hold that a substance is not contrary to another
substance. How then can substance be derived from what are not substances?
Or how can non-substances be prior to substance? 

If then we accept both the former argument and this one, we must,
to preserve both, assume a third somewhat as the substratum of the
contraries, such as is spoken of by those who describe the All as
one nature-water or fire or what is intermediate between them. What
is intermediate seems preferable; for fire, earth, air, and water
are already involved with pairs of contraries. There is, therefore,
much to be said for those who make the underlying substance different
from these four; of the rest, the next best choice is air, as presenting
sensible differences in a less degree than the others; and after air,
water. All, however, agree in this, that they differentiate their
One by means of the contraries, such as density and rarity and more
and less, which may of course be generalized, as has already been
said into excess and defect. Indeed this doctrine too (that the One
and excess and defect are the principles of things) would appear to
be of old standing, though in different forms; for the early thinkers
made the two the active and the one the passive principle, whereas
some of the more recent maintain the reverse. 

To suppose then that the elements are three in number would seem,
from these and similar considerations, a plausible view, as I said
before. On the other hand, the view that they are more than three
in number would seem to be untenable. 

For the one substratum is sufficient to be acted on; but if we have
four contraries, there will be two contrarieties, and we shall have
to suppose an intermediate nature for each pair separately. If, on
the other hand, the contrarieties, being two, can generate from each
other, the second contrariety will be superfluous. Moreover, it is
impossible that there should be more than one primary contrariety.
For substance is a single genus of being, so that the principles can
differ only as prior and posterior, not in genus; in a single genus
there is always a single contrariety, all the other contrarieties
in it being held to be reducible to one. 

It is clear then that the number of elements is neither one nor more
than two or three; but whether two or three is, as I said, a question
of considerable difficulty. 

Part 7

We will now give our own account, approaching the question first with
reference to becoming in its widest sense: for we shall be following
the natural order of inquiry if we speak first of common characteristics,
and then investigate the characteristics of special cases.

We say that one thing comes to be from another thing, and one sort
of thing from another sort of thing, both in the case of simple and
of complex things. I mean the following. We can say (1) 'man becomes
musical', (2) what is 'not-musical becomes musical', or (3), the 'not-musical
man becomes a musical man'. Now what becomes in (1) and (2)-'man'
and 'not musical'-I call simple, and what each becomes-'musical'-simple
also. But when (3) we say the 'not-musical man becomes a musical man',
both what becomes and what it becomes are complex. 

As regards one of these simple 'things that become' we say not only
'this becomes so-and-so', but also 'from being this, comes to be so-and-so',
as 'from being not-musical comes to be musical'; as regards the other
we do not say this in all cases, as we do not say (1) 'from being
a man he came to be musical' but only 'the man became musical'.

When a 'simple' thing is said to become something, in one case (1)
it survives through the process, in the other (2) it does not. For
man remains a man and is such even when he becomes musical, whereas
what is not musical or is unmusical does not continue to exist, either
simply or combined with the subject. 

These distinctions drawn, one can gather from surveying the various
cases of becoming in the way we are describing that, as we say, there
must always be an underlying something, namely that which becomes,
and that this, though always one numerically, in form at least is
not one. (By that I mean that it can be described in different ways.)
For 'to be man' is not the same as 'to be unmusical'. One part survives,
the other does not: what is not an opposite survives (for 'man' survives),
but 'not-musical' or 'unmusical' does not survive, nor does the compound
of the two, namely 'unmusical man'. 

We speak of 'becoming that from this' instead of 'this becoming that'
more in the case of what does not survive the change-'becoming musical
from unmusical', not 'from man'-but there are exceptions, as we sometimes
use the latter form of expression even of what survives; we speak
of 'a statue coming to be from bronze', not of the 'bronze becoming
a statue'. The change, however, from an opposite which does not survive
is described indifferently in both ways, 'becoming that from this'
or 'this becoming that'. We say both that 'the unmusical becomes musical',
and that 'from unmusical he becomes musical'. And so both forms are
used of the complex, 'becoming a musical man from an unmusical man',
and unmusical man becoming a musical man'. 

But there are different senses of 'coming to be'. In some cases we
do not use the expression 'come to be', but 'come to be so-and-so'.
Only substances are said to 'come to be' in the unqualified sense.

Now in all cases other than substance it is plain that there must
be some subject, namely, that which becomes. For we know that when
a thing comes to be of such a quantity or quality or in such a relation,
time, or place, a subject is always presupposed, since substance alone
is not predicated of another subject, but everything else of substance.

But that substances too, and anything else that can be said 'to be'
without qualification, come to be from some substratum, will appear
on examination. For we find in every case something that underlies
from which proceeds that which comes to be; for instance, animals
and plants from seed. 

Generally things which come to be, come to be in different ways: (1)
by change of shape, as a statue; (2) by addition, as things which
grow; (3) by taking away, as the Hermes from the stone; (4) by putting
together, as a house; (5) by alteration, as things which 'turn' in
respect of their material substance. 

It is plain that these are all cases of coming to be from a substratum.

Thus, clearly, from what has been said, whatever comes to be is always
complex. There is, on the one hand, (a) something which comes into
existence, and again (b) something which becomes that-the latter (b)
in two senses, either the subject or the opposite. By the 'opposite'
I mean the 'unmusical', by the 'subject' 'man', and similarly I call
the absence of shape or form or order the 'opposite', and the bronze
or stone or gold the 'subject'. 

Plainly then, if there are conditions and principles which constitute
natural objects and from which they primarily are or have come to
be-have come to be, I mean, what each is said to be in its essential
nature, not what each is in respect of a concomitant attribute-plainly,
I say, everything comes to be from both subject and form. For 'musical
man' is composed (in a way) of 'man' and 'musical': you can analyse
it into the definitions of its elements. It is clear then that what
comes to be will come to be from these elements. 

Now the subject is one numerically, though it is two in form. (For
it is the man, the gold-the 'matter' generally-that is counted, for
it is more of the nature of a 'this', and what comes to be does not
come from it in virtue of a concomitant attribute; the privation,
on the other hand, and the contrary are incidental in the process.)
And the positive form is one-the order, the acquired art of music,
or any similar predicate. 

There is a sense, therefore, in which we must declare the principles
to be two, and a sense in which they are three; a sense in which the
contraries are the principles-say for example the musical and the
unmusical, the hot and the cold, the tuned and the untuned-and a sense
in which they are not, since it is impossible for the contraries to
be acted on by each other. But this difficulty also is solved by the
fact that the substratum is different from the contraries, for it
is itself not a contrary. The principles therefore are, in a way,
not more in number than the contraries, but as it were two, nor yet
precisely two, since there is a difference of essential nature, but
three. For 'to be man' is different from 'to be unmusical', and 'to
be unformed' from 'to be bronze'. 

We have now stated the number of the principles of natural objects
which are subject to generation, and how the number is reached: and
it is clear that there must be a substratum for the contraries, and
that the contraries must be two. (Yet in another way of putting it
this is not necessary, as one of the contraries will serve to effect
the change by its successive absence and presence.) 

The underlying nature is an object of scientific knowledge, by an
analogy. For as the bronze is to the statue, the wood to the bed,
or the matter and the formless before receiving form to any thing
which has form, so is the underlying nature to substance, i.e. the
'this' or existent. 

This then is one principle (though not one or existent in the same
sense as the 'this'), and the definition was one as we agreed; then
further there is its contrary, the privation. In what sense these
are two, and in what sense more, has been stated above. Briefly, we
explained first that only the contraries were principles, and later
that a substratum was indispensable, and that the principles were
three; our last statement has elucidated the difference between the
contraries, the mutual relation of the principles, and the nature
of the substratum. Whether the form or the substratum is the essential
nature of a physical object is not yet clear. But that the principles
are three, and in what sense, and the way in which each is a principle,
is clear. 

So much then for the question of the number and the nature of the
principles. 

Part 8

We will now proceed to show that the difficulty of the early thinkers,
as well as our own, is solved in this way alone. 

The first of those who studied science were misled in their search
for truth and the nature of things by their inexperience, which as
it were thrust them into another path. So they say that none of the
things that are either comes to be or passes out of existence, because
what comes to be must do so either from what is or from what is not,
both of which are impossible. For what is cannot come to be (because
it is already), and from what is not nothing could have come to be
(because something must be present as a substratum). So too they exaggerated
the consequence of this, and went so far as to deny even the existence
of a plurality of things, maintaining that only Being itself is. Such
then was their opinion, and such the reason for its adoption.

Our explanation on the other hand is that the phrases 'something comes
to be from what is or from what is not', 'what is not or what is does
something or has something done to it or becomes some particular thing',
are to be taken (in the first way of putting our explanation) in the
same sense as 'a doctor does something or has something done to him',
'is or becomes something from being a doctor.' These expressions may
be taken in two senses, and so too, clearly, may 'from being', and
'being acts or is acted on'. A doctor builds a house, not qua doctor,
but qua housebuilder, and turns gray, not qua doctor, but qua dark-haired.
On the other hand he doctors or fails to doctor qua doctor. But we
are using words most appropriately when we say that a doctor does
something or undergoes something, or becomes something from being
a doctor, if he does, undergoes, or becomes qua doctor. Clearly then
also 'to come to be so-and-so from not-being' means 'qua not-being'.

It was through failure to make this distinction that those thinkers
gave the matter up, and through this error that they went so much
farther astray as to suppose that nothing else comes to be or exists
apart from Being itself, thus doing away with all becoming.

We ourselves are in agreement with them in holding that nothing can
be said without qualification to come from what is not. But nevertheless
we maintain that a thing may 'come to be from what is not'-that is,
in a qualified sense. For a thing comes to be from the privation,
which in its own nature is not-being,-this not surviving as a constituent
of the result. Yet this causes surprise, and it is thought impossible
that something should come to be in the way described from what is
not. 

In the same way we maintain that nothing comes to be from being, and
that being does not come to be except in a qualified sense. In that
way, however, it does, just as animal might come to be from animal,
and an animal of a certain kind from an animal of a certain kind.
Thus, suppose a dog to come to be from a horse. The dog would then,
it is true, come to be from animal (as well as from an animal of a
certain kind) but not as animal, for that is already there. But if
anything is to become an animal, not in a qualified sense, it will
not be from animal: and if being, not from being-nor from not-being
either, for it has been explained that by 'from not being' we mean
from not-being qua not-being. 

Note further that we do not subvert the principle that everything
either is or is not. 

This then is one way of solving the difficulty. Another consists in
pointing out that the same things can be explained in terms of potentiality
and actuality. But this has been done with greater precision elsewhere.
So, as we said, the difficulties which constrain people to deny the
existence of some of the things we mentioned are now solved. For it
was this reason which also caused some of the earlier thinkers to
turn so far aside from the road which leads to coming to be and passing
away and change generally. If they had come in sight of this nature,
all their ignorance would have been dispelled. 

Part 9

Others, indeed, have apprehended the nature in question, but not adequately.

In the first place they allow that a thing may come to be without
qualification from not being, accepting on this point the statement
of Parmenides. Secondly, they think that if the substratum is one
numerically, it must have also only a single potentiality-which is
a very different thing. 

Now we distinguish matter and privation, and hold that one of these,
namely the matter, is not-being only in virtue of an attribute which
it has, while the privation in its own nature is not-being; and that
the matter is nearly, in a sense is, substance, while the privation
in no sense is. They, on the other hand, identify their Great and
Small alike with not being, and that whether they are taken together
as one or separately. Their triad is therefore of quite a different
kind from ours. For they got so far as to see that there must be some
underlying nature, but they make it one-for even if one philosopher
makes a dyad of it, which he calls Great and Small, the effect is
the same, for he overlooked the other nature. For the one which persists
is a joint cause, with the form, of what comes to be-a mother, as
it were. But the negative part of the contrariety may often seem,
if you concentrate your attention on it as an evil agent, not to exist
at all. 

For admitting with them that there is something divine, good, and
desirable, we hold that there are two other principles, the one contrary
to it, the other such as of its own nature to desire and yearn for
it. But the consequence of their view is that the contrary desires
its wtextinction. Yet the form cannot desire itself, for it is not
defective; nor can the contrary desire it, for contraries are mutually
destructive. The truth is that what desires the form is matter, as
the female desires the male and the ugly the beautiful-only the ugly
or the female not per se but per accidens. 

The matter comes to be and ceases to be in one sense, while in another
it does not. As that which contains the privation, it ceases to be
in its own nature, for what ceases to be-the privation-is contained
within it. But as potentiality it does not cease to be in its own
nature, but is necessarily outside the sphere of becoming and ceasing
to be. For if it came to be, something must have existed as a primary
substratum from which it should come and which should persist in it;
but this is its own special nature, so that it will be before coming
to be. (For my definition of matter is just this-the primary substratum
of each thing, from which it comes to be without qualification, and
which persists in the result.) And if it ceases to be it will pass
into that at the last, so it will have ceased to be before ceasing
to be. 

The accurate determination of the first principle in respect of form,
whether it is one or many and what it is or what they are, is the
province of the primary type of science; so these questions may stand
over till then. But of the natural, i.e. perishable, forms we shall
speak in the expositions which follow. 

The above, then, may be taken as sufficient to establish that there
are principles and what they are and how many there are. Now let us
make a fresh start and proceed. 



BOOK II

Part 1 

Of things that exist, some exist by nature, some from other causes.

'By nature' the animals and their parts exist, and the plants and
the simple bodies (earth, fire, air, water)-for we say that these
and the like exist 'by nature'. 

All the things mentioned present a feature in which they differ from
things which are not constituted by nature. Each of them has within
itself a principle of motion and of stationariness (in respect of
place, or of growth and decrease, or by way of alteration). On the
other hand, a bed and a coat and anything else of that sort, qua receiving
these designations i.e. in so far as they are products of art-have
no innate impulse to change. But in so far as they happen to be composed
of stone or of earth or of a mixture of the two, they do have such
an impulse, and just to that extent which seems to indicate that nature
is a source or cause of being moved and of being at rest in that to
which it belongs primarily, in virtue of itself and not in virtue
of a concomitant attribute. 

I say 'not in virtue of a concomitant attribute', because (for instance)
a man who is a doctor might cure himself. Nevertheless it is not in
so far as he is a patient that he possesses the art of medicine: it
merely has happened that the same man is doctor and patient-and that
is why these attributes are not always found together. So it is with
all other artificial products. None of them has in itself the source
of its own production. But while in some cases (for instance houses
and the other products of manual labour) that principle is in something
else external to the thing, in others those which may cause a change
in themselves in virtue of a concomitant attribute-it lies in the
things themselves (but not in virtue of what they are). 

'Nature' then is what has been stated. Things 'have a nature'which
have a principle of this kind. Each of them is a substance; for it
is a subject, and nature always implies a subject in which it inheres.

The term 'according to nature' is applied to all these things and
also to the attributes which belong to them in virtue of what they
are, for instance the property of fire to be carried upwards-which
is not a 'nature' nor 'has a nature' but is 'by nature' or 'according
to nature'. 

What nature is, then, and the meaning of the terms 'by nature' and
'according to nature', has been stated. That nature exists, it would
be absurd to try to prove; for it is obvious that there are many things
of this kind, and to prove what is obvious by what is not is the mark
of a man who is unable to distinguish what is self-evident from what
is not. (This state of mind is clearly possible. A man blind from
birth might reason about colours. Presumably therefore such persons
must be talking about words without any thought to correspond.)

Some identify the nature or substance of a natural object with that
immediate constituent of it which taken by itself is without arrangement,
e.g. the wood is the 'nature' of the bed, and the bronze the 'nature'
of the statue. 

As an indication of this Antiphon points out that if you planted a
bed and the rotting wood acquired the power of sending up a shoot,
it would not be a bed that would come up, but wood-which shows that
the arrangement in accordance with the rules of the art is merely
an incidental attribute, whereas the real nature is the other, which,
further, persists continuously through the process of making.

But if the material of each of these objects has itself the same relation
to something else, say bronze (or gold) to water, bones (or wood)
to earth and so on, that (they say) would be their nature and essence.
Consequently some assert earth, others fire or air or water or some
or all of these, to be the nature of the things that are. For whatever
any one of them supposed to have this character-whether one thing
or more than one thing-this or these he declared to be the whole of
substance, all else being its affections, states, or dispositions.
Every such thing they held to be eternal (for it could not pass into
anything else), but other things to come into being and cease to be
times without number. 

This then is one account of 'nature', namely that it is the immediate
material substratum of things which have in themselves a principle
of motion or change. 

Another account is that 'nature' is the shape or form which is specified
in the definition of the thing. 

For the word 'nature' is applied to what is according to nature and
the natural in the same way as 'art' is applied to what is artistic
or a work of art. We should not say in the latter case that there
is anything artistic about a thing, if it is a bed only potentially,
not yet having the form of a bed; nor should we call it a work of
art. The same is true of natural compounds. What is potentially flesh
or bone has not yet its own 'nature', and does not exist until it
receives the form specified in the definition, which we name in defining
what flesh or bone is. Thus in the second sense of 'nature' it would
be the shape or form (not separable except in statement) of things
which have in themselves a source of motion. (The combination of the
two, e.g. man, is not 'nature' but 'by nature' or 'natural'.)

The form indeed is 'nature' rather than the matter; for a thing is
more properly said to be what it is when it has attained to fulfilment
than when it exists potentially. Again man is born from man, but not
bed from bed. That is why people say that the figure is not the nature
of a bed, but the wood is-if the bed sprouted not a bed but wood would
come up. But even if the figure is art, then on the same principle
the shape of man is his nature. For man is born from man.

We also speak of a thing's nature as being exhibited in the process
of growth by which its nature is attained. The 'nature' in this sense
is not like 'doctoring', which leads not to the art of doctoring but
to health. Doctoring must start from the art, not lead to it. But
it is not in this way that nature (in the one sense) is related to
nature (in the other). What grows qua growing grows from something
into something. Into what then does it grow? Not into that from which
it arose but into that to which it tends. The shape then is nature.

'Shape' and 'nature', it should be added, are in two senses. For the
privation too is in a way form. But whether in unqualified coming
to be there is privation, i.e. a contrary to what comes to be, we
must consider later. 

Part 2

We have distinguished, then, the different ways in which the term
'nature' is used. 

The next point to consider is how the mathematician differs from the
physicist. Obviously physical bodies contain surfaces and volumes,
lines and points, and these are the subject-matter of mathematics.

Further, is astronomy different from physics or a department of it?
It seems absurd that the physicist should be supposed to know the
nature of sun or moon, but not to know any of their essential attributes,
particularly as the writers on physics obviously do discuss their
shape also and whether the earth and the world are spherical or not.

Now the mathematician, though he too treats of these things, nevertheless
does not treat of them as the limits of a physical body; nor does
he consider the attributes indicated as the attributes of such bodies.
That is why he separates them; for in thought they are separable from
motion, and it makes no difference, nor does any falsity result, if
they are separated. The holders of the theory of Forms do the same,
though they are not aware of it; for they separate the objects of
physics, which are less separable than those of mathematics. This
becomes plain if one tries to state in each of the two cases the definitions
of the things and of their attributes. 'Odd' and 'even', 'straight'
and 'curved', and likewise 'number', 'line', and 'figure', do not
involve motion; not so 'flesh' and 'bone' and 'man'-these are defined
like 'snub nose', not like 'curved'. 

Similar evidence is supplied by the more physical of the branches
of mathematics, such as optics, harmonics, and astronomy. These are
in a way the converse of geometry. While geometry investigates physical
lines but not qua physical, optics investigates mathematical lines,
but qua physical, not qua mathematical. 

Since 'nature' has two senses, the form and the matter, we must investigate
its objects as we would the essence of snubness. That is, such things
are neither independent of matter nor can be defined in terms of matter
only. Here too indeed one might raise a difficulty. Since there are
two natures, with which is the physicist concerned? Or should he investigate
the combination of the two? But if the combination of the two, then
also each severally. Does it belong then to the same or to different
sciences to know each severally? 

If we look at the ancients, physics would to be concerned with the
matter. (It was only very slightly that Empedocles and Democritus
touched on the forms and the essence.) 

But if on the other hand art imitates nature, and it is the part of
the same discipline to know the form and the matter up to a point
(e.g. the doctor has a knowledge of health and also of bile and phlegm,
in which health is realized, and the builder both of the form of the
house and of the matter, namely that it is bricks and beams, and so
forth): if this is so, it would be the part of physics also to know
nature in both its senses. 

Again, 'that for the sake of which', or the end, belongs to the same
department of knowledge as the means. But the nature is the end or
'that for the sake of which'. For if a thing undergoes a continuous
change and there is a stage which is last, this stage is the end or
'that for the sake of which'. (That is why the poet was carried away
into making an absurd statement when he said 'he has the end for the
sake of which he was born'. For not every stage that is last claims
to be an end, but only that which is best.) 

For the arts make their material (some simply 'make' it, others make
it serviceable), and we use everything as if it was there for our
sake. (We also are in a sense an end. 'That for the sake of which'
has two senses: the distinction is made in our work On Philosophy.)
The arts, therefore, which govern the matter and have knowledge are
two, namely the art which uses the product and the art which directs
the production of it. That is why the using art also is in a sense
directive; but it differs in that it knows the form, whereas the art
which is directive as being concerned with production knows the matter.
For the helmsman knows and prescribes what sort of form a helm should
have, the other from what wood it should be made and by means of what
operations. In the products of art, however, we make the material
with a view to the function, whereas in the products of nature the
matter is there all along. 

Again, matter is a relative term: to each form there corresponds a
special matter. How far then must the physicist know the form or essence?
Up to a point, perhaps, as the doctor must know sinew or the smith
bronze (i.e. until he understands the purpose of each): and the physicist
is concerned only with things whose forms are separable indeed, but
do not exist apart from matter. Man is begotten by man and by the
sun as well. The mode of existence and essence of the separable it
is the business of the primary type of philosophy to define.

Part 3

Now that we have established these distinctions, we must proceed to
consider causes, their character and number. Knowledge is the object
of our inquiry, and men do not think they know a thing till they have
grasped the 'why' of (which is to grasp its primary cause). So clearly
we too must do this as regards both coming to be and passing away
and every kind of physical change, in order that, knowing their principles,
we may try to refer to these principles each of our problems.

In one sense, then, (1) that out of which a thing comes to be and
which persists, is called 'cause', e.g. the bronze of the statue,
the silver of the bowl, and the genera of which the bronze and the
silver are species. 

In another sense (2) the form or the archetype, i.e. the statement
of the essence, and its genera, are called 'causes' (e.g. of the octave
the relation of 2:1, and generally number), and the parts in the definition.

Again (3) the primary source of the change or coming to rest; e.g.
the man who gave advice is a cause, the father is cause of the child,
and generally what makes of what is made and what causes change of
what is changed. 

Again (4) in the sense of end or 'that for the sake of which' a thing
is done, e.g. health is the cause of walking about. ('Why is he walking
about?' we say. 'To be healthy', and, having said that, we think we
have assigned the cause.) The same is true also of all the intermediate
steps which are brought about through the action of something else
as means towards the end, e.g. reduction of flesh, purging, drugs,
or surgical instruments are means towards health. All these things
are 'for the sake of' the end, though they differ from one another
in that some are activities, others instruments. 

This then perhaps exhausts the number of ways in which the term 'cause'
is used. 

As the word has several senses, it follows that there are several
causes of the same thing not merely in virtue of a concomitant attribute),
e.g. both the art of the sculptor and the bronze are causes of the
statue. These are causes of the statue qua statue, not in virtue of
anything else that it may be-only not in the same way, the one being
the material cause, the other the cause whence the motion comes. Some
things cause each other reciprocally, e.g. hard work causes fitness
and vice versa, but again not in the same way, but the one as end,
the other as the origin of change. Further the same thing is the cause
of contrary results. For that which by its presence brings about one
result is sometimes blamed for bringing about the contrary by its
absence. Thus we ascribe the wreck of a ship to the absence of the
pilot whose presence was the cause of its safety. 

All the causes now mentioned fall into four familiar divisions. The
letters are the causes of syllables, the material of artificial products,
fire, &c., of bodies, the parts of the whole, and the premisses of
the conclusion, in the sense of 'that from which'. Of these pairs
the one set are causes in the sense of substratum, e.g. the parts,
the other set in the sense of essence-the whole and the combination
and the form. But the seed and the doctor and the adviser, and generally
the maker, are all sources whence the change or stationariness originates,
while the others are causes in the sense of the end or the good of
the rest; for 'that for the sake of which' means what is best and
the end of the things that lead up to it. (Whether we say the 'good
itself or the 'apparent good' makes no difference.) 

Such then is the number and nature of the kinds of cause.

Now the modes of causation are many, though when brought under heads
they too can be reduced in number. For 'cause' is used in many senses
and even within the same kind one may be prior to another (e.g. the
doctor and the expert are causes of health, the relation 2:1 and number
of the octave), and always what is inclusive to what is particular.
Another mode of causation is the incidental and its genera, e.g. in
one way 'Polyclitus', in another 'sculptor' is the cause of a statue,
because 'being Polyclitus' and 'sculptor' are incidentally conjoined.
Also the classes in which the incidental attribute is included; thus
'a man' could be said to be the cause of a statue or, generally, 'a
living creature'. An incidental attribute too may be more or less
remote, e.g. suppose that 'a pale man' or 'a musical man' were said
to be the cause of the statue. 

All causes, both proper and incidental, may be spoken of either as
potential or as actual; e.g. the cause of a house being built is either
'house-builder' or 'house-builder building'. 

Similar distinctions can be made in the things of which the causes
are causes, e.g. of 'this statue' or of 'statue' or of 'image' generally,
of 'this bronze' or of 'bronze' or of 'material' generally. So too
with the incidental attributes. Again we may use a complex expression
for either and say, e.g. neither 'Polyclitus' nor 'sculptor' but 'Polyclitus,
sculptor'. 

All these various uses, however, come to six in number, under each
of which again the usage is twofold. Cause means either what is particular
or a genus, or an incidental attribute or a genus of that, and these
either as a complex or each by itself; and all six either as actual
or as potential. The difference is this much, that causes which are
actually at work and particular exist and cease to exist simultaneously
with their effect, e.g. this healing person with this being-healed
person and that house-building man with that being-built house; but
this is not always true of potential causes--the house and the housebuilder
do not pass away simultaneously. 

In investigating the cause of each thing it is always necessary to
seek what is most precise (as also in other things): thus man builds
because he is a builder, and a builder builds in virtue of his art
of building. This last cause then is prior: and so generally.

Further, generic effects should be assigned to generic causes, particular
effects to particular causes, e.g. statue to sculptor, this statue
to this sculptor; and powers are relative to possible effects, actually
operating causes to things which are actually being effected.

This must suffice for our account of the number of causes and the
modes of causation. 

Part 4

But chance also and spontaneity are reckoned among causes: many things
are said both to be and to come to be as a result of chance and spontaneity.
We must inquire therefore in what manner chance and spontaneity are
present among the causes enumerated, and whether they are the same
or different, and generally what chance and spontaneity are.

Some people even question whether they are real or not. They say that
nothing happens by chance, but that everything which we ascribe to
chance or spontaneity has some definite cause, e.g. coming 'by chance'
into the market and finding there a man whom one wanted but did not
expect to meet is due to one's wish to go and buy in the market. Similarly
in other cases of chance it is always possible, they maintain, to
find something which is the cause; but not chance, for if chance were
real, it would seem strange indeed, and the question might be raised,
why on earth none of the wise men of old in speaking of the causes
of generation and decay took account of chance; whence it would seem
that they too did not believe that anything is by chance. But there
is a further circumstance that is surprising. Many things both come
to be and are by chance and spontaneity, and although know that each
of them can be ascribed to some cause (as the old argument said which
denied chance), nevertheless they speak of some of these things as
happening by chance and others not. For this reason also they ought
to have at least referred to the matter in some way or other.

Certainly the early physicists found no place for chance among the
causes which they recognized-love, strife, mind, fire, or the like.
This is strange, whether they supposed that there is no such thing
as chance or whether they thought there is but omitted to mention
it-and that too when they sometimes used it, as Empedocles does when
he says that the air is not always separated into the highest region,
but 'as it may chance'. At any rate he says in his cosmogony that
'it happened to run that way at that time, but it often ran otherwise.'
He tells us also that most of the parts of animals came to be by chance.

There are some too who ascribe this heavenly sphere and all the worlds
to spontaneity. They say that the vortex arose spontaneously, i.e.
the motion that separated and arranged in its present order all that
exists. This statement might well cause surprise. For they are asserting
that chance is not responsible for the existence or generation of
animals and plants, nature or mind or something of the kind being
the cause of them (for it is not any chance thing that comes from
a given seed but an olive from one kind and a man from another); and
yet at the same time they assert that the heavenly sphere and the
divinest of visible things arose spontaneously, having no such cause
as is assigned to animals and plants. Yet if this is so, it is a fact
which deserves to be dwelt upon, and something might well have been
said about it. For besides the other absurdities of the statement,
it is the more absurd that people should make it when they see nothing
coming to be spontaneously in the heavens, but much happening by chance
among the things which as they say are not due to chance; whereas
we should have expected exactly the opposite. 

Others there are who, indeed, believe that chance is a cause, but
that it is inscrutable to human intelligence, as being a divine thing
and full of mystery. 

Thus we must inquire what chance and spontaneity are, whether they
are the same or different, and how they fit into our division of causes.

Part 5

First then we observe that some things always come to pass in the
same way, and others for the most part. It is clearly of neither of
these that chance is said to be the cause, nor can the 'effect of
chance' be identified with any of the things that come to pass by
necessity and always, or for the most part. But as there is a third
class of events besides these two-events which all say are 'by chance'-it
is plain that there is such a thing as chance and spontaneity; for
we know that things of this kind are due to chance and that things
due to chance are of this kind. 

But, secondly, some events are for the sake of something, others not.
Again, some of the former class are in accordance with deliberate
intention, others not, but both are in the class of things which are
for the sake of something. Hence it is clear that even among the things
which are outside the necessary and the normal, there are some in
connexion withwhich the phrase 'for the sake of something' is applicable.
(Events that are for the sake of something include whatever may be
done as a result of thought or of nature.) Things of this kind, then,
when they come to pass incidental are said to be 'by chance'. For
just as a thing is something either in virtue of itself or incidentally,
so may it be a cause. For instance, the housebuilding faculty is in
virtue of itself the cause of a house, whereas the pale or the musical
is the incidental cause. That which is per se cause of the effect
is determinate, but the incidental cause is indeterminable, for the
possible attributes of an individual are innumerable. To resume then;
when a thing of this kind comes to pass among events which are for
the sake of something, it is said to be spontaneous or by chance.
(The distinction between the two must be made later-for the present
it is sufficient if it is plain that both are in the sphere of things
done for the sake of something.) 

Example: A man is engaged in collecting subscriptions for a feast.
He would have gone to such and such a place for the purpose of getting
the money, if he had known. He actually went there for another purpose
and it was only incidentally that he got his money by going there;
and this was not due to the fact that he went there as a rule or necessarily,
nor is the end effected (getting the money) a cause present in himself-it
belongs to the class of things that are intentional and the result
of intelligent deliberation. It is when these conditions are satisfied
that the man is said to have gone 'by chance'. If he had gone of deliberate
purpose and for the sake of this-if he always or normally went there
when he was collecting payments-he would not be said to have gone
'by chance'. 

It is clear then that chance is an incidental cause in the sphere
of those actions for the sake of something which involve purpose.
Intelligent reflection, then, and chance are in the same sphere, for
purpose implies intelligent reflection. 

It is necessary, no doubt, that the causes of what comes to pass by
chance be indefinite; and that is why chance is supposed to belong
to the class of the indefinite and to be inscrutable to man, and why
it might be thought that, in a way, nothing occurs by chance. For
all these statements are correct, because they are well grounded.
Things do, in a way, occur by chance, for they occur incidentally
and chance is an incidental cause. But strictly it is not the cause-without
qualification-of anything; for instance, a housebuilder is the cause
of a house; incidentally, a fluteplayer may be so. 

And the causes of the man's coming and getting the money (when he
did not come for the sake of that) are innumerable. He may have wished
to see somebody or been following somebody or avoiding somebody, or
may have gone to see a spectacle. Thus to say that chance is a thing
contrary to rule is correct. For 'rule' applies to what is always
true or true for the most part, whereas chance belongs to a third
type of event. Hence, to conclude, since causes of this kind are indefinite,
chance too is indefinite. (Yet in some cases one might raise the question
whether any incidental fact might be the cause of the chance occurrence,
e.g. of health the fresh air or the sun's heat may be the cause, but
having had one's hair cut cannot; for some incidental causes are more
relevant to the effect than others.) 

Chance or fortune is called 'good' when the result is good, 'evil'
when it is evil. The terms 'good fortune' and 'ill fortune' are used
when either result is of considerable magnitude. Thus one who comes
within an ace of some great evil or great good is said to be fortunate
or unfortunate. The mind affirms the essence of the attribute, ignoring
the hair's breadth of difference. Further, it is with reason that
good fortune is regarded as unstable; for chance is unstable, as none
of the things which result from it can be invariable or normal.

Both are then, as I have said, incidental causes-both chance and spontaneity-in
the sphere of things which are capable of coming to pass not necessarily,
nor normally, and with reference to such of these as might come to
pass for the sake of something. 

Part 6

They differ in that 'spontaneity' is the wider term. Every result
of chance is from what is spontaneous, but not everything that is
from what is spontaneous is from chance. 

Chance and what results from chance are appropriate to agents that
are capable of good fortune and of moral action generally. Therefore
necessarily chance is in the sphere of moral actions. This is indicated
by the fact that good fortune is thought to be the same, or nearly
the same, as happiness, and happiness to be a kind of moral action,
since it is well-doing. Hence what is not capable of moral action
cannot do anything by chance. Thus an inanimate thing or a lower animal
or a child cannot do anything by chance, because it is incapable of
deliberate intention; nor can 'good fortune' or 'ill fortune' be ascribed
to them, except metaphorically, as Protarchus, for example, said that
the stones of which altars are made are fortunate because they are
held in honour, while their fellows are trodden under foot. Even these
things, however, can in a way be affected by chance, when one who
is dealing with them does something to them by chance, but not otherwise.

The spontaneous on the other hand is found both in the lower animals
and in many inanimate objects. We say, for example, that the horse
came 'spontaneously', because, though his coming saved him, he did
not come for the sake of safety. Again, the tripod fell 'of itself',
because, though when it fell it stood on its feet so as to serve for
a seat, it did not fall for the sake of that. 

Hence it is clear that events which (1) belong to the general class
of things that may come to pass for the sake of something, (2) do
not come to pass for the sake of what actually results, and (3) have
an external cause, may be described by the phrase 'from spontaneity'.
These 'spontaneous' events are said to be 'from chance' if they have
the further characteristics of being the objects of deliberate intention
and due to agents capable of that mode of action. This is indicated
by the phrase 'in vain', which is used when A which is for the sake
of B, does not result in B. For instance, taking a walk is for the
sake of evacuation of the bowels; if this does not follow after walking,
we say that we have walked 'in vain' and that the walking was 'vain'.
This implies that what is naturally the means to an end is 'in vain',
when it does not effect the end towards which it was the natural means-for
it would be absurd for a man to say that he had bathed in vain because
the sun was not eclipsed, since the one was not done with a view to
the other. Thus the spontaneous is even according to its derivation
the case in which the thing itself happens in vain. The stone that
struck the man did not fall for the purpose of striking him; therefore
it fell spontaneously, because it might have fallen by the action
of an agent and for the purpose of striking. The difference between
spontaneity and what results by chance is greatest in things that
come to be by nature; for when anything comes to be contrary to nature,
we do not say that it came to be by chance, but by spontaneity. Yet
strictly this too is different from the spontaneous proper; for the
cause of the latter is external, that of the former internal.

We have now explained what chance is and what spontaneity is, and
in what they differ from each other. Both belong to the mode of causation
'source of change', for either some natural or some intelligent agent
is always the cause; but in this sort of causation the number of possible
causes is infinite. 

Spontaneity and chance are causes of effects which though they might
result from intelligence or nature, have in fact been caused by something
incidentally. Now since nothing which is incidental is prior to what
is per se, it is clear that no incidental cause can be prior to a
cause per se. Spontaneity and chance, therefore, are posterior to
intelligence and nature. Hence, however true it may be that the heavens
are due to spontaneity, it will still be true that intelligence and
nature will be prior causes of this All and of many things in it besides.

Part 7

It is clear then that there are causes, and that the number of them
is what we have stated. The number is the same as that of the things
comprehended under the question 'why'. The 'why' is referred ultimately
either (1), in things which do not involve motion, e.g. in mathematics,
to the 'what' (to the definition of 'straight line' or 'commensurable',
&c.), or (2) to what initiated a motion, e.g. 'why did they go to
war?-because there had been a raid'; or (3) we are inquiring 'for
the sake of what?'-'that they may rule'; or (4), in the case of things
that come into being, we are looking for the matter. The causes, therefore,
are these and so many in number. 

Now, the causes being four, it is the business of the physicist to
know about them all, and if he refers his problems back to all of
them, he will assign the 'why' in the way proper to his science-the
matter, the form, the mover, 'that for the sake of which'. The last
three often coincide; for the 'what' and 'that for the sake of which'
are one, while the primary source of motion is the same in species
as these (for man generates man), and so too, in general, are all
things which cause movement by being themselves moved; and such as
are not of this kind are no longer inside the province of physics,
for they cause motion not by possessing motion or a source of motion
in themselves, but being themselves incapable of motion. Hence there
are three branches of study, one of things which are incapable of
motion, the second of things in motion, but indestructible, the third
of destructible things. 

The question 'why', then, is answered by reference to the matter,
to the form, and to the primary moving cause. For in respect of coming
to be it is mostly in this last way that causes are investigated-'what
comes to be after what? what was the primary agent or patient?' and
so at each step of the series. 

Now the principles which cause motion in a physical way are two, of
which one is not physical, as it has no principle of motion in itself.
Of this kind is whatever causes movement, not being itself moved,
such as (1) that which is completely unchangeable, the primary reality,
and (2) the essence of that which is coming to be, i.e. the form;
for this is the end or 'that for the sake of which'. Hence since nature
is for the sake of something, we must know this cause also. We must
explain the 'why' in all the senses of the term, namely, (1) that
from this that will necessarily result ('from this' either without
qualification or in most cases); (2) that 'this must be so if that
is to be so' (as the conclusion presupposes the premisses); (3) that
this was the essence of the thing; and (4) because it is better thus
(not without qualification, but with reference to the essential nature
in each case). 

Part 8

We must explain then (1) that Nature belongs to the class of causes
which act for the sake of something; (2) about the necessary and its
place in physical problems, for all writers ascribe things to this
cause, arguing that since the hot and the cold, &c., are of such and
such a kind, therefore certain things necessarily are and come to
be-and if they mention any other cause (one his 'friendship and strife',
another his 'mind'), it is only to touch on it, and then good-bye
to it. 

A difficulty presents itself: why should not nature work, not for
the sake of something, nor because it is better so, but just as the
sky rains, not in order to make the corn grow, but of necessity? What
is drawn up must cool, and what has been cooled must become water
and descend, the result of this being that the corn grows. Similarly
if a man's crop is spoiled on the threshing-floor, the rain did not
fall for the sake of this-in order that the crop might be spoiled-but
that result just followed. Why then should it not be the same with
the parts in nature, e.g. that our teeth should come up of necessity-the
front teeth sharp, fitted for tearing, the molars broad and useful
for grinding down the food-since they did not arise for this end,
but it was merely a coincident result; and so with all other parts
in which we suppose that there is purpose? Wherever then all the parts
came about just what they would have been if they had come be for
an end, such things survived, being organized spontaneously in a fitting
way; whereas those which grew otherwise perished and continue to perish,
as Empedocles says his 'man-faced ox-progeny' did. 

Such are the arguments (and others of the kind) which may cause difficulty
on this point. Yet it is impossible that this should be the true view.
For teeth and all other natural things either invariably or normally
come about in a given way; but of not one of the results of chance
or spontaneity is this true. We do not ascribe to chance or mere coincidence
the frequency of rain in winter, but frequent rain in summer we do;
nor heat in the dog-days, but only if we have it in winter. If then,
it is agreed that things are either the result of coincidence or for
an end, and these cannot be the result of coincidence or spontaneity,
it follows that they must be for an end; and that such things are
all due to nature even the champions of the theory which is before
us would agree. Therefore action for an end is present in things which
come to be and are by nature. 

Further, where a series has a completion, all the preceding steps
are for the sake of that. Now surely as in intelligent action, so
in nature; and as in nature, so it is in each action, if nothing interferes.
Now intelligent action is for the sake of an end; therefore the nature
of things also is so. Thus if a house, e.g. had been a thing made
by nature, it would have been made in the same way as it is now by
art; and if things made by nature were made also by art, they would
come to be in the same way as by nature. Each step then in the series
is for the sake of the next; and generally art partly completes what
nature cannot bring to a finish, and partly imitates her. If, therefore,
artificial products are for the sake of an end, so clearly also are
natural products. The relation of the later to the earlier terms of
the series is the same in both. This is most obvious in the animals
other than man: they make things neither by art nor after inquiry
or deliberation. Wherefore people discuss whether it is by intelligence
or by some other faculty that these creatures work,spiders, ants,
and the like. By gradual advance in this direction we come to see
clearly that in plants too that is produced which is conducive to
the end-leaves, e.g. grow to provide shade for the fruit. If then
it is both by nature and for an end that the swallow makes its nest
and the spider its web, and plants grow leaves for the sake of the
fruit and send their roots down (not up) for the sake of nourishment,
it is plain that this kind of cause is operative in things which come
to be and are by nature. And since 'nature' means two things, the
matter and the form, of which the latter is the end, and since all
the rest is for the sake of the end, the form must be the cause in
the sense of 'that for the sake of which'. 

Now mistakes come to pass even in the operations of art: the grammarian
makes a mistake in writing and the doctor pours out the wrong dose.
Hence clearly mistakes are possible in the operations of nature also.
If then in art there are cases in which what is rightly produced serves
a purpose, and if where mistakes occur there was a purpose in what
was attempted, only it was not attained, so must it be also in natural
products, and monstrosities will be failures in the purposive effort.
Thus in the original combinations the 'ox-progeny' if they failed
to reach a determinate end must have arisen through the corruption
of some principle corresponding to what is now the seed.

Further, seed must have come into being first, and not straightway
the animals: the words 'whole-natured first...' must have meant seed.

Again, in plants too we find the relation of means to end, though
the degree of organization is less. Were there then in plants also
'olive-headed vine-progeny', like the 'man-headed ox-progeny', or
not? An absurd suggestion; yet there must have been, if there were
such things among animals. 

Moreover, among the seeds anything must have come to be at random.
But the person who asserts this entirely does away with 'nature' and
what exists 'by nature'. For those things are natural which, by a
continuous movement originated from an internal principle, arrive
at some completion: the same completion is not reached from every
principle; nor any chance completion, but always the tendency in each
is towards the same end, if there is no impediment. 

The end and the means towards it may come about by chance. We say,
for instance, that a stranger has come by chance, paid the ransom,
and gone away, when he does so as if he had come for that purpose,
though it was not for that that he came. This is incidental, for chance
is an incidental cause, as I remarked before. But when an event takes
place always or for the most part, it is not incidental or by chance.
In natural products the sequence is invariable, if there is no impediment.

It is absurd to suppose that purpose is not present because we do
not observe the agent deliberating. Art does not deliberate. If the
ship-building art were in the wood, it would produce the same results
by nature. If, therefore, purpose is present in art, it is present
also in nature. The best illustration is a doctor doctoring himself:
nature is like that. 

It is plain then that nature is a cause, a cause that operates for
a purpose. 

Part 9

As regards what is 'of necessity', we must ask whether the necessity
is 'hypothetical', or 'simple' as well. The current view places what
is of necessity in the process of production, just as if one were
to suppose that the wall of a house necessarily comes to be because
what is heavy is naturally carried downwards and what is light to
the top, wherefore the stones and foundations take the lowest place,
with earth above because it is lighter, and wood at the top of all
as being the lightest. Whereas, though the wall does not come to be
without these, it is not due to these, except as its material cause:
it comes to be for the sake of sheltering and guarding certain things.
Similarly in all other things which involve production for an end;
the product cannot come to be without things which have a necessary
nature, but it is not due to these (except as its material); it comes
to be for an end. For instance, why is a saw such as it is? To effect
so-and-so and for the sake of so-and-so. This end, however, cannot
be realized unless the saw is made of iron. It is, therefore, necessary
for it to be of iron, it we are to have a saw and perform the operation
of sawing. What is necessary then, is necessary on a hypothesis; it
is not a result necessarily determined by antecedents. Necessity is
in the matter, while 'that for the sake of which' is in the definition.

Necessity in mathematics is in a way similar to necessity in things
which come to be through the operation of nature. Since a straight
line is what it is, it is necessary that the angles of a triangle
should equal two right angles. But not conversely; though if the angles
are not equal to two right angles, then the straight line is not what
it is either. But in things which come to be for an end, the reverse
is true. If the end is to exist or does exist, that also which precedes
it will exist or does exist; otherwise just as there, if-the conclusion
is not true, the premiss will not be true, so here the end or 'that
for the sake of which' will not exist. For this too is itself a starting-point,
but of the reasoning, not of the action; while in mathematics the
starting-point is the starting-point of the reasoning only, as there
is no action. If then there is to be a house, such-and-such things
must be made or be there already or exist, or generally the matter
relative to the end, bricks and stones if it is a house. But the end
is not due to these except as the matter, nor will it come to exist
because of them. Yet if they do not exist at all, neither will the
house, or the saw-the former in the absence of stones, the latter
in the absence of iron-just as in the other case the premisses will
not be true, if the angles of the triangle are not equal to two right
angles. 

The necessary in nature, then, is plainly what we call by the name
of matter, and the changes in it. Both causes must be stated by the
physicist, but especially the end; for that is the cause of the matter,
not vice versa; and the end is 'that for the sake of which', and the
beginning starts from the definition or essence; as in artificial
products, since a house is of such-and-such a kind, certain things
must necessarily come to be or be there already, or since health is
this, these things must necessarily come to be or be there already.
Similarly if man is this, then these; if these, then those. Perhaps
the necessary is present also in the definition. For if one defines
the operation of sawing as being a certain kind of dividing, then
this cannot come about unless the saw has teeth of a certain kind;
and these cannot be unless it is of iron. For in the definition too
there are some parts that are, as it were, its matter. 



BOOK III

Part 1 

Nature has been defined as a 'principle of motion and change', and
it is the subject of our inquiry. We must therefore see that we understand
the meaning of 'motion'; for if it were unknown, the meaning of 'nature'
too would be unknown. 

When we have determined the nature of motion, our next task will be
to attack in the same way the terms which are involved in it. Now
motion is supposed to belong to the class of things which are continuous;
and the infinite presents itself first in the continuous-that is how
it comes about that 'infinite' is often used in definitions of the
continuous ('what is infinitely divisible is continuous'). Besides
these, place, void, and time are thought to be necessary conditions
of motion. 

Clearly, then, for these reasons and also because the attributes mentioned
are common to, and coextensive with, all the objects of our science,
we must first take each of them in hand and discuss it. For the investigation
of special attributes comes after that of the common attributes.

To begin then, as we said, with motion. 
We may start by distinguishing (1) what exists in a state of fulfilment
only, (2) what exists as potential, (3) what exists as potential and
also in fulfilment-one being a 'this', another 'so much', a third
'such', and similarly in each of the other modes of the predication
of being. 

Further, the word 'relative' is used with reference to (1) excess
and defect, (2) agent and patient and generally what can move and
what can be moved. For 'what can cause movement' is relative to 'what
can be moved', and vice versa. 

Again, there is no such thing as motion over and above the things.
It is always with respect to substance or to quantity or to quality
or to place that what changes changes. But it is impossible, as we
assert, to find anything common to these which is neither 'this' nor
quantum nor quale nor any of the other predicates. Hence neither will
motion and change have reference to something over and above the things
mentioned, for there is nothing over and above them. 

Now each of these belongs to all its subjects in either of two ways:
namely (1) substance-the one is positive form, the other privation;
(2) in quality, white and black; (3) in quantity, complete and incomplete;
(4) in respect of locomotion, upwards and downwards or light and heavy.
Hence there are as many types of motion or change as there are meanings
of the word 'is'. 

We have now before us the distinctions in the various classes of being
between what is full real and what is potential. 

Def. The fulfilment of what exists potentially, in so far as it exists
potentially, is motion-namely, of what is alterable qua alterable,
alteration: of what can be increased and its opposite what can be
decreased (there is no common name), increase and decrease: of what
can come to be and can pass away, coming to he and passing away: of
what can be carried along, locomotion. 

Examples will elucidate this definition of motion. When the buildable,
in so far as it is just that, is fully real, it is being built, and
this is building. Similarly, learning, doctoring, rolling, leaping,
ripening, ageing. 

The same thing, if it is of a certain kind, can be both potential
and fully real, not indeed at the same time or not in the same respect,
but e.g. potentially hot and actually cold. Hence at once such things
will act and be acted on by one another in many ways: each of them
will be capable at the same time of causing alteration and of being
altered. Hence, too, what effects motion as a physical agent can be
moved: when a thing of this kind causes motion, it is itself also
moved. This, indeed, has led some people to suppose that every mover
is moved. But this question depends on another set of arguments, and
the truth will be made clear later. is possible for a thing to cause
motion, though it is itself incapable of being moved. 

It is the fulfilment of what is potential when it is already fully
real and operates not as itself but as movable, that is motion. What
I mean by 'as' is this: Bronze is potentially a statue. But it is
not the fulfilment of bronze as bronze which is motion. For 'to be
bronze' and 'to be a certain potentiality' are not the same.

If they were identical without qualification, i.e. in definition,
the fulfilment of bronze as bronze would have been motion. But they
are not the same, as has been said. (This is obvious in contraries.
'To be capable of health' and 'to be capable of illness' are not the
same, for if they were there would be no difference between being
ill and being well. Yet the subject both of health and of sickness-whether
it is humour or blood-is one and the same.) 

We can distinguish, then, between the two-just as, to give another
example, 'colour' and visible' are different-and clearly it is the
fulfilment of what is potential as potential that is motion. So this,
precisely, is motion. 

Further it is evident that motion is an attribute of a thing just
when it is fully real in this way, and neither before nor after. For
each thing of this kind is capable of being at one time actual, at
another not. Take for instance the buildable as buildable. The actuality
of the buildable as buildable is the process of building. For the
actuality of the buildable must be either this or the house. But when
there is a house, the buildable is no longer buildable. On the other
hand, it is the buildable which is being built. The process then of
being built must be the kind of actuality required But building is
a kind of motion, and the same account will apply to the other kinds
also. 

Part 2

The soundness of this definition is evident both when we consider
the accounts of motion that the others have given, and also from the
difficulty of defining it otherwise. 

One could not easily put motion and change in another genus-this is
plain if we consider where some people put it; they identify motion
with or 'inequality' or 'not being'; but such things are not necessarily
moved, whether they are 'different' or 'unequal' or 'non-existent';
Nor is change either to or from these rather than to or from their
opposites. 

The reason why they put motion into these genera is that it is thought
to be something indefinite, and the principles in the second column
are indefinite because they are privative: none of them is either
'this' or 'such' or comes under any of the other modes of predication.
The reason in turn why motion is thought to be indefinite is that
it cannot be classed simply as a potentiality or as an actuality-a
thing that is merely capable of having a certain size is not undergoing
change, nor yet a thing that is actually of a certain size, and motion
is thought to be a sort of actuality, but incomplete, the reason for
this view being that the potential whose actuality it is is incomplete.
This is why it is hard to grasp what motion is. It is necessary to
class it with privation or with potentiality or with sheer actuality,
yet none of these seems possible. There remains then the suggested
mode of definition, namely that it is a sort of actuality, or actuality
of the kind described, hard to grasp, but not incapable of existing.

The mover too is moved, as has been said-every mover, that is, which
is capable of motion, and whose immobility is rest-when a thing is
subject to motion its immobility is rest. For to act on the movable
as such is just to move it. But this it does by contact, so that at
the same time it is also acted on. Hence we can define motion as the
fulfilment of the movable qua movable, the cause of the attribute
being contact with what can move so that the mover is also acted on.
The mover or agent will always be the vehicle of a form, either a
'this' or 'such', which, when it acts, will be the source and cause
of the change, e.g. the full-formed man begets man from what is potentially
man. 

Part 3

The solution of the difficulty that is raised about the motion-whether
it is in the movable-is plain. It is the fulfilment of this potentiality,
and by the action of that which has the power of causing motion; and
the actuality of that which has the power of causing motion is not
other than the actuality of the movable, for it must be the fulfilment
of both. A thing is capable of causing motion because it can do this,
it is a mover because it actually does it. But it is on the movable
that it is capable of acting. Hence there is a single actuality of
both alike, just as one to two and two to one are the same interval,
and the steep ascent and the steep descent are one-for these are one
and the same, although they can be described in different ways. So
it is with the mover and the moved. 

This view has a dialectical difficulty. Perhaps it is necessary that
the actuality of the agent and that of the patient should not be the
same. The one is 'agency' and the other 'patiency'; and the outcome
and completion of the one is an 'action', that of the other a 'passion'.
Since then they are both motions, we may ask: in what are they, if
they are different? Either (a) both are in what is acted on and moved,
or (b) the agency is in the agent and the patiency in the patient.
(If we ought to call the latter also 'agency', the word would be used
in two senses.) 

Now, in alternative (b), the motion will be in the mover, for the
same statement will hold of 'mover' and 'moved'. Hence either every
mover will be moved, or, though having motion, it will not be moved.

If on the other hand (a) both are in what is moved and acted on-both
the agency and the patiency (e.g. both teaching and learning, though
they are two, in the learner), then, first, the actuality of each
will not be present in each, and, a second absurdity, a thing will
have two motions at the same time. How will there be two alterations
of quality in one subject towards one definite quality? The thing
is impossible: the actualization will be one. 

But (some one will say) it is contrary to reason to suppose that there
should be one identical actualization of two things which are different
in kind. Yet there will be, if teaching and learning are the same,
and agency and patiency. To teach will be the same as to learn, and
to act the same as to be acted on-the teacher will necessarily be
learning everything that he teaches, and the agent will be acted on.
One may reply: 

(1) It is not absurd that the actualization of one thing should be
in another. Teaching is the activity of a person who can teach, yet
the operation is performed on some patient-it is not cut adrift from
a subject, but is of A on B. 

(2) There is nothing to prevent two things having one and the same
actualization, provided the actualizations are not described in the
same way, but are related as what can act to what is acting.

(3) Nor is it necessary that the teacher should learn, even if to
act and to be acted on are one and the same, provided they are not
the same in definition (as 'raiment' and 'dress'), but are the same
merely in the sense in which the road from Thebes to Athens and the
road from Athens to Thebes are the same, as has been explained above.
For it is not things which are in a way the same that have all their
attributes the same, but only such as have the same definition. But
indeed it by no means follows from the fact that teaching is the same
as learning, that to learn is the same as to teach, any more than
it follows from the fact that there is one distance between two things
which are at a distance from each other, that the two vectors AB and
Ba, are one and the same. To generalize, teaching is not the same
as learning, or agency as patiency, in the full sense, though they
belong to the same subject, the motion; for the 'actualization of
X in Y' and the 'actualization of Y through the action of X' differ
in definition. 

What then Motion is, has been stated both generally and particularly.
It is not difficult to see how each of its types will be defined-alteration
is the fulfillment of the alterable qua alterable (or, more scientifically,
the fulfilment of what can act and what can be acted on, as such)-generally
and again in each particular case, building, healing, &c. A similar
definition will apply to each of the other kinds of motion.

Part 4

The science of nature is concerned with spatial magnitudes and motion
and time, and each of these at least is necessarily infinite or finite,
even if some things dealt with by the science are not, e.g. a quality
or a point-it is not necessary perhaps that such things should be
put under either head. Hence it is incumbent on the person who specializes
in physics to discuss the infinite and to inquire whether there is
such a thing or not, and, if there is, what it is. 

The appropriateness to the science of this problem is clearly indicated.
All who have touched on this kind of science in a way worth considering
have formulated views about the infinite, and indeed, to a man, make
it a principle of things. 

(1) Some, as the Pythagoreans and Plato, make the infinite a principle
in the sense of a self-subsistent substance, and not as a mere attribute
of some other thing. Only the Pythagoreans place the infinite among
the objects of sense (they do not regard number as separable from
these), and assert that what is outside the heaven is infinite. Plato,
on the other hand, holds that there is no body outside (the Forms
are not outside because they are nowhere),yet that the infinite is
present not only in the objects of sense but in the Forms also.

Further, the Pythagoreans identify the infinite with the even. For
this, they say, when it is cut off and shut in by the odd, provides
things with the element of infinity. An indication of this is what
happens with numbers. If the gnomons are placed round the one, and
without the one, in the one construction the figure that results is
always different, in the other it is always the same. But Plato has
two infinites, the Great and the Small. 

The physicists, on the other hand, all of them, always regard the
infinite as an attribute of a substance which is different from it
and belongs to the class of the so-called elements-water or air or
what is intermediate between them. Those who make them limited in
number never make them infinite in amount. But those who make the
elements infinite in number, as Anaxagoras and Democritus do, say
that the infinite is continuous by contact-compounded of the homogeneous
parts according to the one, of the seed-mass of the atomic shapes
according to the other. 

Further, Anaxagoras held that any part is a mixture in the same way
as the All, on the ground of the observed fact that anything comes
out of anything. For it is probably for this reason that he maintains
that once upon a time all things were together. (This flesh and this
bone were together, and so of any thing: therefore all things: and
at the same time too.) For there is a beginning of separation, not
only for each thing, but for all. Each thing that comes to be comes
from a similar body, and there is a coming to be of all things, though
not, it is true, at the same time. Hence there must also be an origin
of coming to be. One such source there is which he calls Mind, and
Mind begins its work of thinking from some starting-point. So necessarily
all things must have been together at a certain time, and must have
begun to be moved at a certain time. 

Democritus, for his part, asserts the contrary, namely that no element
arises from another element. Nevertheless for him the common body
is a source of all things, differing from part to part in size and
in shape. 

It is clear then from these considerations that the inquiry concerns
the physicist. Nor is it without reason that they all make it a principle
or source. We cannot say that the infinite has no effect, and the
only effectiveness which we can ascribe to it is that of a principle.
Everything is either a source or derived from a source. But there
cannot be a source of the infinite or limitless, for that would be
a limit of it. Further, as it is a beginning, it is both uncreatable
and indestructible. For there must be a point at which what has come
to be reaches completion, and also a termination of all passing away.
That is why, as we say, there is no principle of this, but it is this
which is held to be the principle of other things, and to encompass
all and to steer all, as those assert who do not recognize, alongside
the infinite, other causes, such as Mind or Friendship. Further they
identify it with the Divine, for it is 'deathless and imperishable'
as Anaximander says, with the majority of the physicists.

Belief in the existence of the infinite comes mainly from five considerations:

(1) From the nature of time-for it is infinite. 
(2) From the division of magnitudes-for the mathematicians also use
the notion of the infinite. 

(3) If coming to be and passing away do not give out, it is only because
that from which things come to be is infinite. 

(4) Because the limited always finds its limit in something, so that
there must be no limit, if everything is always limited by something
different from itself. 

(5) Most of all, a reason which is peculiarly appropriate and presents
the difficulty that is felt by everybody-not only number but also
mathematical magnitudes and what is outside the heaven are supposed
to be infinite because they never give out in our thought.

The last fact (that what is outside is infinite) leads people to suppose
that body also is infinite, and that there is an infinite number of
worlds. Why should there be body in one part of the void rather than
in another? Grant only that mass is anywhere and it follows that it
must be everywhere. Also, if void and place are infinite, there must
be infinite body too, for in the case of eternal things what may be
must be. But the problem of the infinite is difficult: many contradictions
result whether we suppose it to exist or not to exist. If it exists,
we have still to ask how it exists; as a substance or as the essential
attribute of some entity? Or in neither way, yet none the less is
there something which is infinite or some things which are infinitely
many? 

The problem, however, which specially belongs to the physicist is
to investigate whether there is a sensible magnitude which is infinite.

We must begin by distinguishing the various senses in which the term
'infinite' is used. 

(1) What is incapable of being gone through, because it is not in
its nature to be gone through (the sense in which the voice is 'invisible').

(2) What admits of being gone through, the process however having
no termination, or what scarcely admits of being gone through.

(3) What naturally admits of being gone through, but is not actually
gone through or does not actually reach an end. 

Further, everything that is infinite may be so in respect of addition
or division or both. 

Part 5

Now it is impossible that the infinite should be a thing which is
itself infinite, separable from sensible objects. If the infinite
is neither a magnitude nor an aggregate, but is itself a substance
and not an attribute, it will be indivisible; for the divisible must
be either a magnitude or an aggregate. But if indivisible, then not
infinite, except in the sense (1) in which the voice is 'invisible'.
But this is not the sense in which it is used by those who say that
the infinite exists, nor that in which we are investigating it, namely
as (2) 'that which cannot be gone through'. But if the infinite exists
as an attribute, it would not be, qua infinite an element in substances,
any more than the invisible would be an element of speech, though
the voice is invisible. 

Further, how can the infinite be itself any thing, unless both number
and magnitude, of which it is an essential attribute, exist in that
way? If they are not substances, a fortiori the infinite is not.

It is plain, too, that the infinite cannot be an actual thing and
a substance and principle. For any part of it that is taken will be
infinite, if it has parts: for 'to be infinite' and 'the infinite'
are the same, if it is a substance and not predicated of a subject.
Hence it will be either indivisible or divisible into infinites. But
the same thing cannot be many infinites. (Yet just as part of air
is air, so a part of the infinite would be infinite, if it is supposed
to be a substance and principle.) Therefore the infinite must be without
parts and indivisible. But this cannot be true of what is infinite
in full completion: for it must be a definite quantity. 

Suppose then that infinity belongs to substance as an attribute. But,
if so, it cannot, as we have said, be described as a principle, but
rather that of which it is an attribute-the air or the even number.

Thus the view of those who speak after the manner of the Pythagoreans
is absurd. With the same breath they treat the infinite as substance,
and divide it into parts. 

This discussion, however, involves the more general question whether
the infinite can be present in mathematical objects and things which
are intelligible and do not have extension, as well as among sensible
objects. Our inquiry (as physicists) is limited to its special subject-matter,
the objects of sense, and we have to ask whether there is or is not
among them a body which is infinite in the direction of increase.

We may begin with a dialectical argument and show as follows that
there is no such thing. If 'bounded by a surface' is the definition
of body there cannot be an infinite body either intelligible or sensible.
Nor can number taken in abstraction be infinite, for number or that
which has number is numerable. If then the numerable can be numbered,
it would also be possible to go through the infinite. 

If, on the other hand, we investigate the question more in accordance
with principles appropriate to physics, we are led as follows to the
same result. 

The infinite body must be either (1) compound, or (2) simple; yet
neither alternative is possible. 

(1) Compound the infinite body will not be, if the elements are finite
in number. For they must be more than one, and the contraries must
always balance, and no one of them can be infinite. If one of the
bodies falls in any degree short of the other in potency-suppose fire
is finite in amount while air is infinite and a given quantity of
fire exceeds in power the same amount of air in any ratio provided
it is numerically definite-the infinite body will obviously prevail
over and annihilate the finite body. On the other hand, it is impossible
that each should be infinite. 'Body' is what has extension in all
directions and the infinite is what is boundlessly extended, so that
the infinite body would be extended in all directions ad infinitum.

Nor (2) can the infinite body be one and simple, whether it is, as
some hold, a thing over and above the elements (from which they generate
the elements) or is not thus qualified. 

(a) We must consider the former alternative; for there are some people
who make this the infinite, and not air or water, in order that the
other elements may not be annihilated by the element which is infinite.
They have contrariety with each other-air is cold, water moist, fire
hot; if one were infinite, the others by now would have ceased to
be. As it is, they say, the infinite is different from them and is
their source. 

It is impossible, however, that there should be such a body; not because
it is infinite on that point a general proof can be given which applies
equally to all, air, water, or anything else-but simply because there
is, as a matter of fact, no such sensible body, alongside the so-called
elements. Everything can be resolved into the elements of which it
is composed. Hence the body in question would have been present in
our world here, alongside air and fire and earth and water: but nothing
of the kind is observed. 

(b) Nor can fire or any other of the elements be infinite. For generally,
and apart from the question of how any of them could be infinite,
the All, even if it were limited, cannot either be or become one of
them, as Heraclitus says that at some time all things become fire.
(The same argument applies also to the one which the physicists suppose
to exist alongside the elements: for everything changes from contrary
to contrary, e.g. from hot to cold). 

The preceding consideration of the various cases serves to show us
whether it is or is not possible that there should be an infinite
sensible body. The following arguments give a general demonstration
that it is not possible. 

It is the nature of every kind of sensible body to be somewhere, and
there is a place appropriate to each, the same for the part and for
the whole, e.g. for the whole earth and for a single clod, and for
fire and for a spark. 

Suppose (a) that the infinite sensible body is homogeneous. Then each
part will be either immovable or always being carried along. Yet neither
is possible. For why downwards rather than upwards or in any other
direction? I mean, e.g, if you take a clod, where will it be moved
or where will it be at rest? For ex hypothesi the place of the body
akin to it is infinite. Will it occupy the whole place, then? And
how? What then will be the nature of its rest and of its movement,
or where will they be? It will either be at home everywhere-then it
will not be moved; or it will be moved everywhere-then it will not
come to rest. 

But if (b) the All has dissimilar parts, the proper places of the
parts will be dissimilar also, and the body of the All will have no
unity except that of contact. Then, further, the parts will be either
finite or infinite in variety of kind. (i) Finite they cannot be,
for if the All is to be infinite, some of them would have to be infinite,
while the others were not, e.g. fire or water will be infinite. But,
as we have seen before, such an element would destroy what is contrary
to it. (This indeed is the reason why none of the physicists made
fire or earth the one infinite body, but either water or air or what
is intermediate between them, because the abode of each of the two
was plainly determinate, while the others have an ambiguous place
between up and down.) 

But (ii) if the parts are infinite in number and simple, their proper
places too will be infinite in number, and the same will be true of
the elements themselves. If that is impossible, and the places are
finite, the whole too must be finite; for the place and the body cannot
but fit each other. Neither is the whole place larger than what can
be filled by the body (and then the body would no longer be infinite),
nor is the body larger than the place; for either there would be an
empty space or a body whose nature it is to be nowhere. 

Anaxagoras gives an absurd account of why the infinite is at rest.
He says that the infinite itself is the cause of its being fixed.
This because it is in itself, since nothing else contains it-on the
assumption that wherever anything is, it is there by its own nature.
But this is not true: a thing could be somewhere by compulsion, and
not where it is its nature to be. 

Even if it is true as true can be that the whole is not moved (for
what is fixed by itself and is in itself must be immovable), yet we
must explain why it is not its nature to be moved. It is not enough
just to make this statement and then decamp. Anything else might be
in a state of rest, but there is no reason why it should not be its
nature to be moved. The earth is not carried along, and would not
be carried along if it were infinite, provided it is held together
by the centre. But it would not be because there was no other region
in which it could be carried along that it would remain at the centre,
but because this is its nature. Yet in this case also we may say that
it fixes itself. If then in the case of the earth, supposed to be
infinite, it is at rest, not because it is infinite, but because it
has weight and what is heavy rests at the centre and the earth is
at the centre, similarly the infinite also would rest in itself, not
because it is infinite and fixes itself, but owing to some other cause.

Another difficulty emerges at the same time. Any part of the infinite
body ought to remain at rest. Just as the infinite remains at rest
in itself because it fixes itself, so too any part of it you may take
will remain in itself. The appropriate places of the whole and of
the part are alike, e.g. of the whole earth and of a clod the appropriate
place is the lower region; of fire as a whole and of a spark, the
upper region. If, therefore, to be in itself is the place of the infinite,
that also will be appropriate to the part. Therefore it will remain
in itself. 

In general, the view that there is an infinite body is plainly incompatible
with the doctrine that there is necessarily a proper place for each
kind of body, if every sensible body has either weight or lightness,
and if a body has a natural locomotion towards the centre if it is
heavy, and upwards if it is light. This would need to be true of the
infinite also. But neither character can belong to it: it cannot be
either as a whole, nor can it be half the one and half the other.
For how should you divide it? or how can the infinite have the one
part up and the other down, or an extremity and a centre?

Further, every sensible body is in place, and the kinds or differences
of place are up-down, before-behind, right-left; and these distinctions
hold not only in relation to us and by arbitrary agreement, but also
in the whole itself. But in the infinite body they cannot exist. In
general, if it is impossible that there should be an infinite place,
and if every body is in place, there cannot be an infinite body.

Surely what is in a special place is in place, and what is in place
is in a special place. Just, then, as the infinite cannot be quantity-that
would imply that it has a particular quantity, e,g, two or three cubits;
quantity just means these-so a thing's being in place means that it
is somewhere, and that is either up or down or in some other of the
six differences of position: but each of these is a limit.

It is plain from these arguments that there is no body which is actually
infinite. 

Part 6

But on the other hand to suppose that the infinite does not exist
in any way leads obviously to many impossible consequences: there
will be a beginning and an end of time, a magnitude will not be divisible
into magnitudes, number will not be infinite. If, then, in view of
the above considerations, neither alternative seems possible, an arbiter
must be called in; and clearly there is a sense in which the infinite
exists and another in which it does not. 

We must keep in mind that the word 'is' means either what potentially
is or what fully is. Further, a thing is infinite either by addition
or by division. 

Now, as we have seen, magnitude is not actually infinite. But by division
it is infinite. (There is no difficulty in refuting the theory of
indivisible lines.) The alternative then remains that the infinite
has a potential existence. 

But the phrase 'potential existence' is ambiguous. When we speak of
the potential existence of a statue we mean that there will be an
actual statue. It is not so with the infinite. There will not be an
actual infinite. The word 'is' has many senses, and we say that the
infinite 'is' in the sense in which we say 'it is day' or 'it is the
games', because one thing after another is always coming into existence.
For of these things too the distinction between potential and actual
existence holds. We say that there are Olympic games, both in the
sense that they may occur and that they are actually occurring.

The infinite exhibits itself in different ways-in time, in the generations
of man, and in the division of magnitudes. For generally the infinite
has this mode of existence: one thing is always being taken after
another, and each thing that is taken is always finite, but always
different. Again, 'being' has more than one sense, so that we must
not regard the infinite as a 'this', such as a man or a horse, but
must suppose it to exist in the sense in which we speak of the day
or the games as existing things whose being has not come to them like
that of a substance, but consists in a process of coming to be or
passing away; definite if you like at each stage, yet always different.

But when this takes place in spatial magnitudes, what is taken perists,
while in the succession of time and of men it takes place by the passing
away of these in such a way that the source of supply never gives
out. 

In a way the infinite by addition is the same thing as the infinite
by division. In a finite magnitude, the infinite by addition comes
about in a way inverse to that of the other. For in proportion as
we see division going on, in the same proportion we see addition being
made to what is already marked off. For if we take a determinate part
of a finite magnitude and add another part determined by the same
ratio (not taking in the same amount of the original whole), and so
on, we shall not traverse the given magnitude. But if we increase
the ratio of the part, so as always to take in the same amount, we
shall traverse the magnitude, for every finite magnitude is exhausted
by means of any determinate quantity however small. 

The infinite, then, exists in no other way, but in this way it does
exist, potentially and by reduction. It exists fully in the sense
in which we say 'it is day' or 'it is the games'; and potentially
as matter exists, not independently as what is finite does.

By addition then, also, there is potentially an infinite, namely,
what we have described as being in a sense the same as the infinite
in respect of division. For it will always be possible to take something
ah extra. Yet the sum of the parts taken will not exceed every determinate
magnitude, just as in the direction of division every determinate
magnitude is surpassed in smallness and there will be a smaller part.

But in respect of addition there cannot be an infinite which even
potentially exceeds every assignable magnitude, unless it has the
attribute of being actually infinite, as the physicists hold to be
true of the body which is outside the world, whose essential nature
is air or something of the kind. But if there cannot be in this way
a sensible body which is infinite in the full sense, evidently there
can no more be a body which is potentially infinite in respect of
addition, except as the inverse of the infinite by division, as we
have said. It is for this reason that Plato also made the infinites
two in number, because it is supposed to be possible to exceed all
limits and to proceed ad infinitum in the direction both of increase
and of reduction. Yet though he makes the infinites two, he does not
use them. For in the numbers the infinite in the direction of reduction
is not present, as the monad is the smallest; nor is the infinite
in the direction of increase, for the parts number only up to the
decad. 

The infinite turns out to be the contrary of what it is said to be.
It is not what has nothing outside it that is infinite, but what always
has something outside it. This is indicated by the fact that rings
also that have no bezel are described as 'endless', because it is
always possible to take a part which is outside a given part. The
description depends on a certain similarity, but it is not true in
the full sense of the word. This condition alone is not sufficient:
it is necessary also that the next part which is taken should never
be the same. In the circle, the latter condition is not satisfied:
it is only the adjacent part from which the new part is different.

Our definition then is as follows: 
A quantity is infinite if it is such that we can always take a part
outside what has been already taken. On the other hand, what has nothing
outside it is complete and whole. For thus we define the whole-that
from which nothing is wanting, as a whole man or a whole box. What
is true of each particular is true of the whole as such-the whole
is that of which nothing is outside. On the other hand that from which
something is absent and outside, however small that may be, is not
'all'. 'Whole' and 'complete' are either quite identical or closely
akin. Nothing is complete (teleion) which has no end (telos); and
the end is a limit. 

Hence Parmenides must be thought to have spoken better than Melissus.
The latter says that the whole is infinite, but the former describes
it as limited, 'equally balanced from the middle'. For to connect
the infinite with the all and the whole is not like joining two pieces
of string; for it is from this they get the dignity they ascribe to
the infinite-its containing all things and holding the all in itself-from
its having a certain similarity to the whole. It is in fact the matter
of the completeness which belongs to size, and what is potentially
a whole, though not in the full sense. It is divisible both in the
direction of reduction and of the inverse addition. It is a whole
and limited; not, however, in virtue of its own nature, but in virtue
of what is other than it. It does not contain, but, in so far as it
is infinite, is contained. Consequently, also, it is unknowable, qua
infinite; for the matter has no form. (Hence it is plain that the
infinite stands in the relation of part rather than of whole. For
the matter is part of the whole, as the bronze is of the bronze statue.)
If it contains in the case of sensible things, in the case of intelligible
things the great and the small ought to contain them. But it is absurd
and impossible to suppose that the unknowable and indeterminate should
contain and determine. 

Part 7

It is reasonable that there should not be held to be an infinite in
respect of addition such as to surpass every magnitude, but that there
should be thought to be such an infinite in the direction of division.
For the matter and the infinite are contained inside what contains
them, while it is the form which contains. It is natural too to suppose
that in number there is a limit in the direction of the minimum, and
that in the other direction every assigned number is surpassed. In
magnitude, on the contrary, every assigned magnitude is surpassed
in the direction of smallness, while in the other direction there
is no infinite magnitude. The reason is that what is one is indivisible
whatever it may be, e.g. a man is one man, not many. Number on the
other hand is a plurality of 'ones' and a certain quantity of them.
Hence number must stop at the indivisible: for 'two' and 'three' are
merely derivative terms, and so with each of the other numbers. But
in the direction of largeness it is always possible to think of a
larger number: for the number of times a magnitude can be bisected
is infinite. Hence this infinite is potential, never actual: the number
of parts that can be taken always surpasses any assigned number. But
this number is not separable from the process of bisection, and its
infinity is not a permanent actuality but consists in a process of
coming to be, like time and the number of time. 

With magnitudes the contrary holds. What is continuous is divided
ad infinitum, but there is no infinite in the direction of increase.
For the size which it can potentially be, it can also actually be.
Hence since no sensible magnitude is infinite, it is impossible to
exceed every assigned magnitude; for if it were possible there would
be something bigger than the heavens. 

The infinite is not the same in magnitude and movement and time, in
the sense of a single nature, but its secondary sense depends on its
primary sense, i.e. movement is called infinite in virtue of the magnitude
covered by the movement (or alteration or growth), and time because
of the movement. (I use these terms for the moment. Later I shall
explain what each of them means, and also why every magnitude is divisible
into magnitudes.) 

Our account does not rob the mathematicians of their science, by disproving
the actual existence of the infinite in the direction of increase,
in the sense of the untraversable. In point of fact they do not need
the infinite and do not use it. They postulate only that the finite
straight line may be produced as far as they wish. It is possible
to have divided in the same ratio as the largest quantity another
magnitude of any size you like. Hence, for the purposes of proof,
it will make no difference to them to have such an infinite instead,
while its existence will be in the sphere of real magnitudes.

In the fourfold scheme of causes, it is plain that the infinite is
a cause in the sense of matter, and that its essence is privation,
the subject as such being what is continuous and sensible. All the
other thinkers, too, evidently treat the infinite as matter-that is
why it is inconsistent in them to make it what contains, and not what
is contained. 

Part 8

It remains to dispose of the arguments which are supposed to support
the view that the infinite exists not only potentially but as a separate
thing. Some have no cogency; others can be met by fresh objections
that are valid. 

(1) In order that coming to be should not fail, it is not necessary
that there should be a sensible body which is actually infinite. The
passing away of one thing may be the coming to be of another, the
All being limited. 

(2) There is a difference between touching and being limited. The
former is relative to something and is the touching of something (for
everything that touches touches something), and further is an attribute
of some one of the things which are limited. On the other hand, what
is limited is not limited in relation to anything. Again, contact
is not necessarily possible between any two things taken at random.

(3) To rely on mere thinking is absurd, for then the excess or defect
is not in the thing but in the thought. One might think that one of
us is bigger than he is and magnify him ad infinitum. But it does
not follow that he is bigger than the size we are, just because some
one thinks he is, but only because he is the size he is. The thought
is an accident. 

(a) Time indeed and movement are infinite, and also thinking, in the
sense that each part that is taken passes in succession out of existence.

(b) Magnitude is not infinite either in the way of reduction or of
magnification in thought. 

This concludes my account of the way in which the infinite exists,
and of the way in which it does not exist, and of what it is.



BOOK IV

Part 1 

The physicist must have a knowledge of Place, too, as well as of
the infinite-namely, whether there is such a thing or not, and the
manner of its existence and what it is-both because all suppose that
things which exist are somewhere (the non-existent is nowhere--where
is the goat-stag or the sphinx?), and because 'motion' in its most
general and primary sense is change of place, which we call 'locomotion'.

The question, what is place? presents many difficulties. An examination
of all the relevant facts seems to lead to divergent conclusions.
Moreover, we have inherited nothing from previous thinkers, whether
in the way of a statement of difficulties or of a solution.

The existence of place is held to be obvious from the fact of mutual
replacement. Where water now is, there in turn, when the water has
gone out as from a vessel, air is present. When therefore another
body occupies this same place, the place is thought to be different
from all the bodies which come to be in it and replace one another.
What now contains air formerly contained water, so that clearly the
place or space into which and out of which they passed was something
different from both. 

Further, the typical locomotions of the elementary natural bodies-namely,
fire, earth, and the like-show not only that place is something, but
also that it exerts a certain influence. Each is carried to its own
place, if it is not hindered, the one up, the other down. Now these
are regions or kinds of place-up and down and the rest of the six
directions. Nor do such distinctions (up and down and right and left,
&c.) hold only in relation to us. To us they are not always the same
but change with the direction in which we are turned: that is why
the same thing may be both right and left, up and down, before and
behind. But in nature each is distinct, taken apart by itself. It
is not every chance direction which is 'up', but where fire and what
is light are carried; similarly, too, 'down' is not any chance direction
but where what has weight and what is made of earth are carried-the
implication being that these places do not differ merely in relative
position, but also as possessing distinct potencies. This is made
plain also by the objects studied by mathematics. Though they have
no real place, they nevertheless, in respect of their position relatively
to us, have a right and left as attributes ascribed to them only in
consequence of their relative position, not having by nature these
various characteristics. Again, the theory that the void exists involves
the existence of place: for one would define void as place bereft
of body. 

These considerations then would lead us to suppose that place is something
distinct from bodies, and that every sensible body is in place. Hesiod
too might be held to have given a correct account of it when he made
chaos first. At least he says: 

'First of all things came chaos to being, then broad-breasted earth,'
implying that things need to have space first, because he thought,
with most people, that everything is somewhere and in place. If this
is its nature, the potency of place must be a marvellous thing, and
take precedence of all other things. For that without which nothing
else can exist, while it can exist without the others, must needs
be first; for place does not pass out of existence when the things
in it are annihilated. 

True, but even if we suppose its existence settled, the question of
its nature presents difficulty-whether it is some sort of 'bulk' of
body or some entity other than that, for we must first determine its
genus. 

(1) Now it has three dimensions, length, breadth, depth, the dimensions
by which all body also is bounded. But the place cannot be body; for
if it were there would be two bodies in the same place. 

(2) Further, if body has a place and space, clearly so too have surface
and the other limits of body; for the same statement will apply to
them: where the bounding planes of the water were, there in turn will
be those of the air. But when we come to a point we cannot make a
distinction between it and its place. Hence if the place of a point
is not different from the point, no more will that of any of the others
be different, and place will not be something different from each
of them. 

(3) What in the world then are we to suppose place to be? If it has
the sort of nature described, it cannot be an element or composed
of elements, whether these be corporeal or incorporeal: for while
it has size, it has not body. But the elements of sensible bodies
are bodies, while nothing that has size results from a combination
of intelligible elements. 

(4) Also we may ask: of what in things is space the cause? None of
the four modes of causation can be ascribed to it. It is neither in
the sense of the matter of existents (for nothing is composed of it),
nor as the form and definition of things, nor as end, nor does it
move existents. 

(5) Further, too, if it is itself an existent, where will it be? Zeno's
difficulty demands an explanation: for if everything that exists has
a place, place too will have a place, and so on ad infinitum.

(6) Again, just as every body is in place, so, too, every place has
a body in it. What then shall we say about growing things? It follows
from these premisses that their place must grow with them, if their
place is neither less nor greater than they are. 

By asking these questions, then, we must raise the whole problem about
place-not only as to what it is, but even whether there is such a
thing. 

Part 2

We may distinguish generally between predicating B of A because it
(A) is itself, and because it is something else; and particularly
between place which is common and in which all bodies are, and the
special place occupied primarily by each. I mean, for instance, that
you are now in the heavens because you are in the air and it is in
the heavens; and you are in the air because you are on the earth;
and similarly on the earth because you are in this place which contains
no more than you. 

Now if place is what primarily contains each body, it would be a limit,
so that the place would be the form or shape of each body by which
the magnitude or the matter of the magnitude is defined: for this
is the limit of each body. 

If, then, we look at the question in this way the place of a thing
is its form. But, if we regard the place as the extension of the magnitude,
it is the matter. For this is different from the magnitude: it is
what is contained and defined by the form, as by a bounding plane.
Matter or the indeterminate is of this nature; when the boundary and
attributes of a sphere are taken away, nothing but the matter is left.

This is why Plato in the Timaeus says that matter and space are the
same; for the 'participant' and space are identical. (It is true,
indeed, that the account he gives there of the 'participant' is different
from what he says in his so-called 'unwritten teaching'. Nevertheless,
he did identify place and space.) I mention Plato because, while all
hold place to be something, he alone tried to say what it is.

In view of these facts we should naturally expect to find difficulty
in determining what place is, if indeed it is one of these two things,
matter or form. They demand a very close scrutiny, especially as it
is not easy to recognize them apart. 

But it is at any rate not difficult to see that place cannot be either
of them. The form and the matter are not separate from the thing,
whereas the place can be separated. As we pointed out, where air was,
water in turn comes to be, the one replacing the other; and similarly
with other bodies. Hence the place of a thing is neither a part nor
a state of it, but is separable from it. For place is supposed to
be something like a vessel-the vessel being a transportable place.
But the vessel is no part of the thing. 

In so far then as it is separable from the thing, it is not the form:
qua containing, it is different from the matter. 

Also it is held that what is anywhere is both itself something and
that there is a different thing outside it. (Plato of course, if we
may digress, ought to tell us why the form and the numbers are not
in place, if 'what participates' is place-whether what participates
is the Great and the Small or the matter, as he called it in writing
in the Timaeus.) 

Further, how could a body be carried to its own place, if place was
the matter or the form? It is impossible that what has no reference
to motion or the distinction of up and down can be place. So place
must be looked for among things which have these characteristics.

If the place is in the thing (it must be if it is either shape or
matter) place will have a place: for both the form and the indeterminate
undergo change and motion along with the thing, and are not always
in the same place, but are where the thing is. Hence the place will
have a place. 

Further, when water is produced from air, the place has been destroyed,
for the resulting body is not in the same place. What sort of destruction
then is that? 

This concludes my statement of the reasons why space must be something,
and again of the difficulties that may be raised about its essential
nature. 

Part 3

The next step we must take is to see in how many senses one thing
is said to be 'in' another. 

(1) As the finger is 'in' the hand and generally the part 'in' the
whole. 

(2) As the whole is 'in' the parts: for there is no whole over and
above the parts. 

(3) As man is 'in' animal and generally species 'in' genus.

(4) As the genus is 'in' the species and generally the part of the
specific form 'in' the definition of the specific form. 

(5) As health is 'in' the hot and the cold and generally the form
'in' the matter. 

(6) As the affairs of Greece centre 'in' the king, and generally events
centre 'in' their primary motive agent. 

(7) As the existence of a thing centres 'in its good and generally
'in' its end, i.e. in 'that for the sake of which' it exists.

(8) In the strictest sense of all, as a thing is 'in' a vessel, and
generally 'in' place. 

One might raise the question whether a thing can be in itself, or
whether nothing can be in itself-everything being either nowhere or
in something else. 

The question is ambiguous; we may mean the thing qua itself or qua
something else. 

When there are parts of a whole-the one that in which a thing is,
the other the thing which is in it-the whole will be described as
being in itself. For a thing is described in terms of its parts, as
well as in terms of the thing as a whole, e.g. a man is said to be
white because the visible surface of him is white, or to be scientific
because his thinking faculty has been trained. The jar then will not
be in itself and the wine will not be in itself. But the jar of wine
will: for the contents and the container are both parts of the same
whole. 

In this sense then, but not primarily, a thing can be in itself, namely,
as 'white' is in body (for the visible surface is in body), and science
is in the mind. 

It is from these, which are 'parts' (in the sense at least of being
'in' the man), that the man is called white, &c. But the jar and the
wine in separation are not parts of a whole, though together they
are. So when there are parts, a thing will be in itself, as 'white'
is in man because it is in body, and in body because it resides in
the visible surface. We cannot go further and say that it is in surface
in virtue of something other than itself. (Yet it is not in itself:
though these are in a way the same thing,) they differ in essence,
each having a special nature and capacity, 'surface' and 'white'.

Thus if we look at the matter inductively we do not find anything
to be 'in' itself in any of the senses that have been distinguished;
and it can be seen by argument that it is impossible. For each of
two things will have to be both, e.g. the jar will have to be both
vessel and wine, and the wine both wine and jar, if it is possible
for a thing to be in itself; so that, however true it might be that
they were in each other, the jar will receive the wine in virtue not
of its being wine but of the wine's being wine, and the wine will
be in the jar in virtue not of its being a jar but of the jar's being
a jar. Now that they are different in respect of their essence is
evident; for 'that in which something is' and 'that which is in it'
would be differently defined. 

Nor is it possible for a thing to be in itself even incidentally:
for two things would at the same time in the same thing. The jar would
be in itself-if a thing whose nature it is to receive can be in itself;
and that which it receives, namely (if wine) wine, will be in it.

Obviously then a thing cannot be in itself primarily. 
Zeno's problem-that if Place is something it must be in something-is
not difficult to solve. There is nothing to prevent the first place
from being 'in' something else-not indeed in that as 'in' place, but
as health is 'in' the hot as a positive determination of it or as
the hot is 'in' body as an affection. So we escape the infinite regress.

Another thing is plain: since the vessel is no part of what is in
it (what contains in the strict sense is different from what is contained),
place could not be either the matter or the form of the thing contained,
but must different-for the latter, both the matter and the shape,
are parts of what is contained. 

This then may serve as a critical statement of the difficulties involved.

Part 4

What then after all is place? The answer to this question may be elucidated
as follows. 

Let us take for granted about it the various characteristics which
are supposed correctly to belong to it essentially. We assume then-

(1) Place is what contains that of which it is the place.

(2) Place is no part of the thing. 
(3) The immediate place of a thing is neither less nor greater than
the thing. 

(4) Place can be left behind by the thing and is separable. In addition:

(5) All place admits of the distinction of up and down, and each of
the bodies is naturally carried to its appropriate place and rests
there, and this makes the place either up or down. 

Having laid these foundations, we must complete the theory. We ought
to try to make our investigation such as will render an account of
place, and will not only solve the difficulties connected with it,
but will also show that the attributes supposed to belong to it do
really belong to it, and further will make clear the cause of the
trouble and of the difficulties about it. Such is the most satisfactory
kind of exposition. 

First then we must understand that place would not have been thought
of, if there had not been a special kind of motion, namely that with
respect to place. It is chiefly for this reason that we suppose the
heaven also to be in place, because it is in constant movement. Of
this kind of change there are two species-locomotion on the one hand
and, on the other, increase and diminution. For these too involve
variation of place: what was then in this place has now in turn changed
to what is larger or smaller. 

Again, when we say a thing is 'moved', the predicate either (1) belongs
to it actually, in virtue of its own nature, or (2) in virtue of something
conjoined with it. In the latter case it may be either (a) something
which by its own nature is capable of being moved, e.g. the parts
of the body or the nail in the ship, or (b) something which is not
in itself capable of being moved, but is always moved through its
conjunction with something else, as 'whiteness' or 'science'. These
have changed their place only because the subjects to which they belong
do so. 

We say that a thing is in the world, in the sense of in place, because
it is in the air, and the air is in the world; and when we say it
is in the air, we do not mean it is in every part of the air, but
that it is in the air because of the outer surface of the air which
surrounds it; for if all the air were its place, the place of a thing
would not be equal to the thing-which it is supposed to be, and which
the primary place in which a thing is actually is. 

When what surrounds, then, is not separate from the thing, but is
in continuity with it, the thing is said to be in what surrounds it,
not in the sense of in place, but as a part in a whole. But when the
thing is separate and in contact, it is immediately 'in' the inner
surface of the surrounding body, and this surface is neither a part
of what is in it nor yet greater than its extension, but equal to
it; for the extremities of things which touch are coincident.

Further, if one body is in continuity with another, it is not moved
in that but with that. On the other hand it is moved in that if it
is separate. It makes no difference whether what contains is moved
or not. 

Again, when it is not separate it is described as a part in a whole,
as the pupil in the eye or the hand in the body: when it is separate,
as the water in the cask or the wine in the jar. For the hand is moved
with the body and the water in the cask. 

It will now be plain from these considerations what place is. There
are just four things of which place must be one-the shape, or the
matter, or some sort of extension between the bounding surfaces of
the containing body, or this boundary itself if it contains no extension
over and above the bulk of the body which comes to be in it.

Three of these it obviously cannot be: 
(1) The shape is supposed to be place because it surrounds, for the
extremities of what contains and of what is contained are coincident.
Both the shape and the place, it is true, are boundaries. But not
of the same thing: the form is the boundary of the thing, the place
is the boundary of the body which contains it. 

(2) The extension between the extremities is thought to be something,
because what is contained and separate may often be changed while
the container remains the same (as water may be poured from a vessel)-the
assumption being that the extension is something over and above the
body displaced. But there is no such extension. One of the bodies
which change places and are naturally capable of being in contact
with the container falls in whichever it may chance to be.

If there were an extension which were such as to exist independently
and be permanent, there would be an infinity of places in the same
thing. For when the water and the air change places, all the portions
of the two together will play the same part in the whole which was
previously played by all the water in the vessel; at the same time
the place too will be undergoing change; so that there will be another
place which is the place of the place, and many places will be coincident.
There is not a different place of the part, in which it is moved,
when the whole vessel changes its place: it is always the same: for
it is in the (proximate) place where they are that the air and the
water (or the parts of the water) succeed each other, not in that
place in which they come to be, which is part of the place which is
the place of the whole world. 

(3) The matter, too, might seem to be place, at least if we consider
it in what is at rest and is thus separate but in continuity. For
just as in change of quality there is something which was formerly
black and is now white, or formerly soft and now hard-this is just
why we say that the matter exists-so place, because it presents a
similar phenomenon, is thought to exist-only in the one case we say
so because what was air is now water, in the other because where air
formerly was there a is now water. But the matter, as we said before,
is neither separable from the thing nor contains it, whereas place
has both characteristics. 

Well, then, if place is none of the three-neither the form nor the
matter nor an extension which is always there, different from, and
over and above, the extension of the thing which is displaced-place
necessarily is the one of the four which is left, namely, the boundary
of the containing body at which it is in contact with the contained
body. (By the contained body is meant what can be moved by way of
locomotion.) 

Place is thought to be something important and hard to grasp, both
because the matter and the shape present themselves along with it,
and because the displacement of the body that is moved takes place
in a stationary container, for it seems possible that there should
be an interval which is other than the bodies which are moved. The
air, too, which is thought to be incorporeal, contributes something
to the belief: it is not only the boundaries of the vessel which seem
to be place, but also what is between them, regarded as empty. Just,
in fact, as the vessel is transportable place, so place is a non-portable
vessel. So when what is within a thing which is moved, is moved and
changes its place, as a boat on a river, what contains plays the part
of a vessel rather than that of place. Place on the other hand is
rather what is motionless: so it is rather the whole river that is
place, because as a whole it is motionless. 

Hence we conclude that the innermost motionless boundary of what contains
is place. 

This explains why the middle of the heaven and the surface which faces
us of the rotating system are held to be 'up' and 'down' in the strict
and fullest sense for all men: for the one is always at rest, while
the inner side of the rotating body remains always coincident with
itself. Hence since the light is what is naturally carried up, and
the heavy what is carried down, the boundary which contains in the
direction of the middle of the universe, and the middle itself, are
down, and that which contains in the direction of the outermost part
of the universe, and the outermost part itself, are up. 

For this reason, too, place is thought to be a kind of surface, and
as it were a vessel, i.e. a container of the thing. 

Further, place is coincident with the thing, for boundaries are coincident
with the bounded. 

Part 5

If then a body has another body outside it and containing it, it is
in place, and if not, not. That is why, even if there were to be water
which had not a container, the parts of it, on the one hand, will
be moved (for one part is contained in another), while, on the other
hand, the whole will be moved in one sense, but not in another. For
as a whole it does not simultaneously change its place, though it
will be moved in a circle: for this place is the place of its parts.
(Some things are moved, not up and down, but in a circle; others up
and down, such things namely as admit of condensation and rarefaction.)

As was explained, some things are potentially in place, others actually.
So, when you have a homogeneous substance which is continuous, the
parts are potentially in place: when the parts are separated, but
in contact, like a heap, they are actually in place. 

Again, (1) some things are per se in place, namely every body which
is movable either by way of locomotion or by way of increase is per
se somewhere, but the heaven, as has been said, is not anywhere as
a whole, nor in any place, if at least, as we must suppose, no body
contains it. On the line on which it is moved, its parts have place:
for each is contiguous the next. 

But (2) other things are in place indirectly, through something conjoined
with them, as the soul and the heaven. The latter is, in a way, in
place, for all its parts are: for on the orb one part contains another.
That is why the upper part is moved in a circle, while the All is
not anywhere. For what is somewhere is itself something, and there
must be alongside it some other thing wherein it is and which contains
it. But alongside the All or the Whole there is nothing outside the
All, and for this reason all things are in the heaven; for the heaven,
we may say, is the All. Yet their place is not the same as the heaven.
It is part of it, the innermost part of it, which is in contact with
the movable body; and for this reason the earth is in water, and this
in the air, and the air in the aether, and the aether in heaven, but
we cannot go on and say that the heaven is in anything else.

It is clear, too, from these considerations that all the problems
which were raised about place will be solved when it is explained
in this way: 

(1) There is no necessity that the place should grow with the body
in it, 

(2) Nor that a point should have a place, 
(3) Nor that two bodies should be in the same place, 
(4) Nor that place should be a corporeal interval: for what is between
the boundaries of the place is any body which may chance to be there,
not an interval in body. 

Further, (5) place is also somewhere, not in the sense of being in
a place, but as the limit is in the limited; for not everything that
is is in place, but only movable body. 

Also (6) it is reasonable that each kind of body should be carried
to its own place. For a body which is next in the series and in contact
(not by compulsion) is akin, and bodies which are united do not affect
each other, while those which are in contact interact on each other.

Nor (7) is it without reason that each should remain naturally in
its proper place. For this part has the same relation to its place,
as a separable part to its whole, as when one moves a part of water
or air: so, too, air is related to water, for the one is like matter,
the other form-water is the matter of air, air as it were the actuality
of water, for water is potentially air, while air is potentially water,
though in another way. 

These distinctions will be drawn more carefully later. On the present
occasion it was necessary to refer to them: what has now been stated
obscurely will then be made more clear. If the matter and the fulfilment
are the same thing (for water is both, the one potentially, the other
completely), water will be related to air in a way as part to whole.
That is why these have contact: it is organic union when both become
actually one. 

This concludes my account of place-both of its existence and of its
nature. 

Part 6

The investigation of similar questions about the void, also, must
be held to belong to the physicist-namely whether it exists or not,
and how it exists or what it is-just as about place. The views taken
of it involve arguments both for and against, in much the same sort
of way. For those who hold that the void exists regard it as a sort
of place or vessel which is supposed to be 'full' when it holds the
bulk which it is capable of containing, 'void' when it is deprived
of that-as if 'void' and 'full' and 'place' denoted the same thing,
though the essence of the three is different. 

We must begin the inquiry by putting down the account given by those
who say that it exists, then the account of those who say that it
does not exist, and third the current view on these questions.

Those who try to show that the void does not exist do not disprove
what people really mean by it, but only their erroneous way of speaking;
this is true of Anaxagoras and of those who refute the existence of
the void in this way. They merely give an ingenious demonstration
that air is something--by straining wine-skins and showing the resistance
of the air, and by cutting it off in clepsydras. But people really
mean that there is an empty interval in which there is no sensible
body. They hold that everything which is in body is body and say that
what has nothing in it at all is void (so what is full of air is void).
It is not then the existence of air that needs to be proved, but the
non-existence of an interval, different from the bodies, either separable
or actual-an interval which divides the whole body so as to break
its continuity, as Democritus and Leucippus hold, and many other physicists-or
even perhaps as something which is outside the whole body, which remains
continuous. 

These people, then, have not reached even the threshold of the problem,
but rather those who say that the void exists. 

(1) They argue, for one thing, that change in place (i.e. locomotion
and increase) would not be. For it is maintained that motion would
seem not to exist, if there were no void, since what is full cannot
contain anything more. If it could, and there were two bodies in the
same place, it would also be true that any number of bodies could
be together; for it is impossible to draw a line of division beyond
which the statement would become untrue. If this were possible, it
would follow also that the smallest body would contain the greatest;
for 'many a little makes a mickle': thus if many equal bodies can
be together, so also can many unequal bodies. 

Melissus, indeed, infers from these considerations that the All is
immovable; for if it were moved there must, he says, be void, but
void is not among the things that exist. 

This argument, then, is one way in which they show that there is a
void. 

(2) They reason from the fact that some things are observed to contract
and be compressed, as people say that a cask will hold the wine which
formerly filled it, along with the skins into which the wine has been
decanted, which implies that the compressed body contracts into the
voids present in it. 

Again (3) increase, too, is thought to take always by means of void,
for nutriment is body, and it is impossible for two bodies to be together.
A proof of this they find also in what happens to ashes, which absorb
as much water as the empty vessel. 

The Pythagoreans, too, (4) held that void exists and that it enters
the heaven itself, which as it were inhales it, from the infinite
air. Further it is the void which distinguishes the natures of things,
as if it were like what separates and distinguishes the terms of a
series. This holds primarily in the numbers, for the void distinguishes
their nature. 

These, then, and so many, are the main grounds on which people have
argued for and against the existence of the void. 

Part 7

As a step towards settling which view is true, we must determine the
meaning of the name. 

The void is thought to be place with nothing in it. The reason for
this is that people take what exists to be body, and hold that while
every body is in place, void is place in which there is no body, so
that where there is no body, there must be void. 

Every body, again, they suppose to be tangible; and of this nature
is whatever has weight or lightness. 

Hence, by a syllogism, what has nothing heavy or light in it, is void.

This result, then, as I have said, is reached by syllogism. It would
be absurd to suppose that the point is void; for the void must be
place which has in it an interval in tangible body. 

But at all events we observe then that in one way the void is described
as what is not full of body perceptible to touch; and what has heaviness
and lightness is perceptible to touch. So we would raise the question:
what would they say of an interval that has colour or sound-is it
void or not? Clearly they would reply that if it could receive what
is tangible it was void, and if not, not. 

In another way void is that in which there is no 'this' or corporeal
substance. So some say that the void is the matter of the body (they
identify the place, too, with this), and in this they speak incorrectly;
for the matter is not separable from the things, but they are inquiring
about the void as about something separable. 

Since we have determined the nature of place, and void must, if it
exists, be place deprived of body, and we have stated both in what
sense place exists and in what sense it does not, it is plain that
on this showing void does not exist, either unseparated or separated;
the void is meant to be, not body but rather an interval in body.
This is why the void is thought to be something, viz. because place
is, and for the same reasons. For the fact of motion in respect of
place comes to the aid both of those who maintain that place is something
over and above the bodies that come to occupy it, and of those who
maintain that the void is something. They state that the void is the
condition of movement in the sense of that in which movement takes
place; and this would be the kind of thing that some say place is.

But there is no necessity for there being a void if there is movement.
It is not in the least needed as a condition of movement in general,
for a reason which, incidentally, escaped Melissus; viz. that the
full can suffer qualitative change. 

But not even movement in respect of place involves a void; for bodies
may simultaneously make room for one another, though there is no interval
separate and apart from the bodies that are in movement. And this
is plain even in the rotation of continuous things, as in that of
liquids. 

And things can also be compressed not into a void but because they
squeeze out what is contained in them (as, for instance, when water
is compressed the air within it is squeezed out); and things can increase
in size not only by the entrance of something but also by qualitative
change; e.g. if water were to be transformed into air. 

In general, both the argument about increase of size and that about
water poured on to the ashes get in their own way. For either not
any and every part of the body is increased, or bodies may be increased
otherwise than by the addition of body, or there may be two bodies
in the same place (in which case they are claiming to solve a quite
general difficulty, but are not proving the existence of void), or
the whole body must be void, if it is increased in every part and
is increased by means of void. The same argument applies to the ashes.

It is evident, then, that it is easy to refute the arguments by which
they prove the existence of the void. 

Part 8

Let us explain again that there is no void existing separately, as
some maintain. If each of the simple bodies has a natural locomotion,
e.g. fire upward and earth downward and towards the middle of the
universe, it is clear that it cannot be the void that is the condition
of locomotion. What, then, will the void be the condition of? It is
thought to be the condition of movement in respect of place, and it
is not the condition of this. 

Again, if void is a sort of place deprived of body, when there is
a void where will a body placed in it move to? It certainly cannot
move into the whole of the void. The same argument applies as against
those who think that place is something separate, into which things
are carried; viz. how will what is placed in it move, or rest? Much
the same argument will apply to the void as to the 'up' and 'down'
in place, as is natural enough since those who maintain the existence
of the void make it a place. 

And in what way will things be present either in place-or in the void?
For the expected result does not take place when a body is placed
as a whole in a place conceived of as separate and permanent; for
a part of it, unless it be placed apart, will not be in a place but
in the whole. Further, if separate place does not exist, neither will
void. 

If people say that the void must exist, as being necessary if there
is to be movement, what rather turns out to be the case, if one the
matter, is the opposite, that not a single thing can be moved if there
is a void; for as with those who for a like reason say the earth is
at rest, so, too, in the void things must be at rest; for there is
no place to which things can move more or less than to another; since
the void in so far as it is void admits no difference. 

The second reason is this: all movement is either compulsory or according
to nature, and if there is compulsory movement there must also be
natural (for compulsory movement is contrary to nature, and movement
contrary to nature is posterior to that according to nature, so that
if each of the natural bodies has not a natural movement, none of
the other movements can exist); but how can there be natural movement
if there is no difference throughout the void or the infinite? For
in so far as it is infinite, there will be no up or down or middle,
and in so far as it is a void, up differs no whit from down; for as
there is no difference in what is nothing, there is none in the void
(for the void seems to be a non-existent and a privation of being),
but natural locomotion seems to be differentiated, so that the things
that exist by nature must be differentiated. Either, then, nothing
has a natural locomotion, or else there is no void. 

Further, in point of fact things that are thrown move though that
which gave them their impulse is not touching them, either by reason
of mutual replacement, as some maintain, or because the air that has
been pushed pushes them with a movement quicker than the natural locomotion
of the projectile wherewith it moves to its proper place. But in a
void none of these things can take place, nor can anything be moved
save as that which is carried is moved. 

Further, no one could say why a thing once set in motion should stop
anywhere; for why should it stop here rather than here? So that a
thing will either be at rest or must be moved ad infinitum, unless
something more powerful get in its way. 

Further, things are now thought to move into the void because it yields;
but in a void this quality is present equally everywhere, so that
things should move in all directions. 

Further, the truth of what we assert is plain from the following considerations.
We see the same weight or body moving faster than another for two
reasons, either because there is a difference in what it moves through,
as between water, air, and earth, or because, other things being equal,
the moving body differs from the other owing to excess of weight or
of lightness. 

Now the medium causes a difference because it impedes the moving thing,
most of all if it is moving in the opposite direction, but in a secondary
degree even if it is at rest; and especially a medium that is not
easily divided, i.e. a medium that is somewhat dense. A, then, will
move through B in time G, and through D, which is thinner, in time
E (if the length of B is egual to D), in proportion to the density
of the hindering body. For let B be water and D air; then by so much
as air is thinner and more incorporeal than water, A will move through
D faster than through B. Let the speed have the same ratio to the
speed, then, that air has to water. Then if air is twice as thin,
the body will traverse B in twice the time that it does D, and the
time G will be twice the time E. And always, by so much as the medium
is more incorporeal and less resistant and more easily divided, the
faster will be the movement. 

Now there is no ratio in which the void is exceeded by body, as there
is no ratio of 0 to a number. For if 4 exceeds 3 by 1, and 2 by more
than 1, and 1 by still more than it exceeds 2, still there is no ratio
by which it exceeds 0; for that which exceeds must be divisible into
the excess + that which is exceeded, so that will be what it exceeds
0 by + 0. For this reason, too, a line does not exceed a point unless
it is composed of points! Similarly the void can bear no ratio to
the full, and therefore neither can movement through the one to movement
through the other, but if a thing moves through the thickest medium
such and such a distance in such and such a time, it moves through
the void with a speed beyond any ratio. For let Z be void, equal in
magnitude to B and to D. Then if A is to traverse and move through
it in a certain time, H, a time less than E, however, the void will
bear this ratio to the full. But in a time equal to H, A will traverse
the part O of A. And it will surely also traverse in that time any
substance Z which exceeds air in thickness in the ratio which the
time E bears to the time H. For if the body Z be as much thinner than
D as E exceeds H, A, if it moves through Z, will traverse it in a
time inverse to the speed of the movement, i.e. in a time equal to
H. If, then, there is no body in Z, A will traverse Z still more quickly.
But we supposed that its traverse of Z when Z was void occupied the
time H. So that it will traverse Z in an equal time whether Z be full
or void. But this is impossible. It is plain, then, that if there
is a time in which it will move through any part of the void, this
impossible result will follow: it will be found to traverse a certain
distance, whether this be full or void, in an equal time; for there
will be some body which is in the same ratio to the other body as
the time is to the time. 

To sum the matter up, the cause of this result is obvious, viz. that
between any two movements there is a ratio (for they occupy time,
and there is a ratio between any two times, so long as both are finite),
but there is no ratio of void to full. 

These are the consequences that result from a difference in the media;
the following depend upon an excess of one moving body over another.
We see that bodies which have a greater impulse either of weight or
of lightness, if they are alike in other respects, move faster over
an equal space, and in the ratio which their magnitudes bear to each
other. Therefore they will also move through the void with this ratio
of speed. But that is impossible; for why should one move faster?
(In moving through plena it must be so; for the greater divides them
faster by its force. For a moving thing cleaves the medium either
by its shape, or by the impulse which the body that is carried along
or is projected possesses.) Therefore all will possess equal velocity.
But this is impossible. 

It is evident from what has been said, then, that, if there is a void,
a result follows which is the very opposite of the reason for which
those who believe in a void set it up. They think that if movement
in respect of place is to exist, the void cannot exist, separated
all by itself; but this is the same as to say that place is a separate
cavity; and this has already been stated to be impossible.

But even if we consider it on its own merits the so-called vacuum
will be found to be really vacuous. For as, if one puts a cube in
water, an amount of water equal to the cube will be displaced; so
too in air; but the effect is imperceptible to sense. And indeed always
in the case of any body that can be displaced, must, if it is not
compressed, be displaced in the direction in which it is its nature
to be displaced-always either down, if its locomotion is downwards
as in the case of earth, or up, if it is fire, or in both directions-whatever
be the nature of the inserted body. Now in the void this is impossible;
for it is not body; the void must have penetrated the cube to a distance
equal to that which this portion of void formerly occupied in the
void, just as if the water or air had not been displaced by the wooden
cube, but had penetrated right through it. 

But the cube also has a magnitude equal to that occupied by the void;
a magnitude which, if it is also hot or cold, or heavy or light, is
none the less different in essence from all its attributes, even if
it is not separable from them; I mean the volume of the wooden cube.
So that even if it were separated from everything else and were neither
heavy nor light, it will occupy an equal amount of void, and fill
the same place, as the part of place or of the void equal to itself.
How then will the body of the cube differ from the void or place that
is equal to it? And if there can be two such things, why cannot there
be any number coinciding? 

This, then, is one absurd and impossible implication of the theory.
It is also evident that the cube will have this same volume even if
it is displaced, which is an attribute possessed by all other bodies
also. Therefore if this differs in no respect from its place, why
need we assume a place for bodies over and above the volume of each,
if their volume be conceived of as free from attributes? It contributes
nothing to the situation if there is an equal interval attached to
it as well. [Further it ought to be clear by the study of moving things
what sort of thing void is. But in fact it is found nowhere in the
world. For air is something, though it does not seem to be so-nor,
for that matter, would water, if fishes were made of iron; for the
discrimination of the tangible is by touch.] 

It is clear, then, from these considerations that there is no separate
void. 

Part 9

There are some who think that the existence of rarity and density
shows that there is a void. If rarity and density do not exist, they
say, neither can things contract and be compressed. But if this were
not to take place, either there would be no movement at all, or the
universe would bulge, as Xuthus said, or air and water must always
change into equal amounts (e.g. if air has been made out of a cupful
of water, at the same time out of an equal amount of air a cupful
of water must have been made), or void must necessarily exist; for
compression and expansion cannot take place otherwise. 

Now, if they mean by the rare that which has many voids existing separately,
it is plain that if void cannot exist separate any more than a place
can exist with an extension all to itself, neither can the rare exist
in this sense. But if they mean that there is void, not separately
existent, but still present in the rare, this is less impossible,
yet, first, the void turns out not to be a condition of all movement,
but only of movement upwards (for the rare is light, which is the
reason why they say fire is rare); second, the void turns out to be
a condition of movement not as that in which it takes place, but in
that the void carries things up as skins by being carried up themselves
carry up what is continuous with them. Yet how can void have a local
movement or a place? For thus that into which void moves is till then
void of a void. 

Again, how will they explain, in the case of what is heavy, its movement
downwards? And it is plain that if the rarer and more void a thing
is the quicker it will move upwards, if it were completely void it
would move with a maximum speed! But perhaps even this is impossible,
that it should move at all; the same reason which showed that in the
void all things are incapable of moving shows that the void cannot
move, viz. the fact that the speeds are incomparable. 

Since we deny that a void exists, but for the rest the problem has
been truly stated, that either there will be no movement, if there
is not to be condensation and rarefaction, or the universe will bulge,
or a transformation of water into air will always be balanced by an
equal transformation of air into water (for it is clear that the air
produced from water is bulkier than the water): it is necessary therefore,
if compression does not exist, either that the next portion will be
pushed outwards and make the outermost part bulge, or that somewhere
else there must be an equal amount of water produced out of air, so
that the entire bulk of the whole may be equal, or that nothing moves.
For when anything is displaced this will always happen, unless it
comes round in a circle; but locomotion is not always circular, but
sometimes in a straight line. 

These then are the reasons for which they might say that there is
a void; our statement is based on the assumption that there is a single
matter for contraries, hot and cold and the other natural contrarieties,
and that what exists actually is produced from a potential existent,
and that matter is not separable from the contraries but its being
is different, and that a single matter may serve for colour and heat
and cold. 

The same matter also serves for both a large and a small body. This
is evident; for when air is produced from water, the same matter has
become something different, not by acquiring an addition to it, but
has become actually what it was potentially, and, again, water is
produced from air in the same way, the change being sometimes from
smallness to greatness, and sometimes from greatness to smallness.
Similarly, therefore, if air which is large in extent comes to have
a smaller volume, or becomes greater from being smaller, it is the
matter which is potentially both that comes to be each of the two.

For as the same matter becomes hot from being cold, and cold from
being hot, because it was potentially both, so too from hot it can
become more hot, though nothing in the matter has become hot that
was not hot when the thing was less hot; just as, if the arc or curve
of a greater circle becomes that of a smaller, whether it remains
the same or becomes a different curve, convexity has not come to exist
in anything that was not convex but straight (for differences of degree
do not depend on an intermission of the quality); nor can we get any
portion of a flame, in which both heat and whiteness are not present.
So too, then, is the earlier heat related to the later. So that the
greatness and smallness, also, of the sensible volume are extended,
not by the matter's acquiring anything new, but because the matter
is potentially matter for both states; so that the same thing is dense
and rare, and the two qualities have one matter. 

The dense is heavy, and the rare is light. [Again, as the arc of a
circle when contracted into a smaller space does not acquire a new
part which is convex, but what was there has been contracted; and
as any part of fire that one takes will be hot; so, too, it is all
a question of contraction and expansion of the same matter.] There
are two types in each case, both in the dense and in the rare; for
both the heavy and the hard are thought to be dense, and contrariwise
both the light and the soft are rare; and weight and hardness fail
to coincide in the case of lead and iron. 

From what has been said it is evident, then, that void does not exist
either separate (either absolutely separate or as a separate element
in the rare) or potentially, unless one is willing to call the condition
of movement void, whatever it may be. At that rate the matter of the
heavy and the light, qua matter of them, would be the void; for the
dense and the rare are productive of locomotion in virtue of this
contrariety, and in virtue of their hardness and softness productive
of passivity and impassivity, i.e. not of locomotion but rather of
qualitative change. 

So much, then, for the discussion of the void, and of the sense in
which it exists and the sense in which it does not exist.

Part 10

Next for discussion after the subjects mentioned is Time. The best
plan will be to begin by working out the difficulties connected with
it, making use of the current arguments. First, does it belong to
the class of things that exist or to that of things that do not exist?
Then secondly, what is its nature? To start, then: the following considerations
would make one suspect that it either does not exist at all or barely,
and in an obscure way. One part of it has been and is not, while the
other is going to be and is not yet. Yet time-both infinite time and
any time you like to take-is made up of these. One would naturally
suppose that what is made up of things which do not exist could have
no share in reality. 

Further, if a divisible thing is to exist, it is necessary that, when
it exists, all or some of its parts must exist. But of time some parts
have been, while others have to be, and no part of it is though it
is divisible. For what is 'now' is not a part: a part is a measure
of the whole, which must be made up of parts. Time, on the other hand,
is not held to be made up of 'nows'. 

Again, the 'now' which seems to bound the past and the future-does
it always remain one and the same or is it always other and other?
It is hard to say. 

(1) If it is always different and different, and if none of the parts
in time which are other and other are simultaneous (unless the one
contains and the other is contained, as the shorter time is by the
longer), and if the 'now' which is not, but formerly was, must have
ceased-to-be at some time, the 'nows' too cannot be simultaneous with
one another, but the prior 'now' must always have ceased-to-be. But
the prior 'now' cannot have ceased-to-be in itself (since it then
existed); yet it cannot have ceased-to-be in another 'now'. For we
may lay it down that one 'now' cannot be next to another, any more
than point to point. If then it did not cease-to-be in the next 'now'
but in another, it would exist simultaneously with the innumerable
'nows' between the two-which is impossible. 

Yes, but (2) neither is it possible for the 'now' to remain always
the same. No determinate divisible thing has a single termination,
whether it is continuously extended in one or in more than one dimension:
but the 'now' is a termination, and it is possible to cut off a determinate
time. Further, if coincidence in time (i.e. being neither prior nor
posterior) means to be 'in one and the same "now"', then, if both
what is before and what is after are in this same 'now', things which
happened ten thousand years ago would be simultaneous with what has
happened to-day, and nothing would be before or after anything else.

This may serve as a statement of the difficulties about the attributes
of time. 

As to what time is or what is its nature, the traditional accounts
give us as little light as the preliminary problems which we have
worked through. 

Some assert that it is (1) the movement of the whole, others that
it is (2) the sphere itself. 

(1) Yet part, too, of the revolution is a time, but it certainly is
not a revolution: for what is taken is part of a revolution, not a
revolution. Besides, if there were more heavens than one, the movement
of any of them equally would be time, so that there would be many
times at the same time. 

(2) Those who said that time is the sphere of the whole thought so,
no doubt, on the ground that all things are in time and all things
are in the sphere of the whole. The view is too naive for it to be
worth while to consider the impossibilities implied in it.

But as time is most usually supposed to be (3) motion and a kind of
change, we must consider this view. 

Now (a) the change or movement of each thing is only in the thing
which changes or where the thing itself which moves or changes may
chance to be. But time is present equally everywhere and with all
things. 

Again, (b) change is always faster or slower, whereas time is not:
for 'fast' and 'slow' are defined by time-'fast' is what moves much
in a short time, 'slow' what moves little in a long time; but time
is not defined by time, by being either a certain amount or a certain
kind of it. 

Clearly then it is not movement. (We need not distinguish at present
between 'movement' and 'change'.) 

Part 11

But neither does time exist without change; for when the state of
our own minds does not change at all, or we have not noticed its changing,
we do not realize that time has elapsed, any more than those who are
fabled to sleep among the heroes in Sardinia do when they are awakened;
for they connect the earlier 'now' with the later and make them one,
cutting out the interval because of their failure to notice it. So,
just as, if the 'now' were not different but one and the same, there
would not have been time, so too when its difference escapes our notice
the interval does not seem to be time. If, then, the non-realization
of the existence of time happens to us when we do not distinguish
any change, but the soul seems to stay in one indivisible state, and
when we perceive and distinguish we say time has elapsed, evidently
time is not independent of movement and change. It is evident, then,
that time is neither movement nor independent of movement.

We must take this as our starting-point and try to discover-since
we wish to know what time is-what exactly it has to do with movement.

Now we perceive movement and time together: for even when it is dark
and we are not being affected through the body, if any movement takes
place in the mind we at once suppose that some time also has elapsed;
and not only that but also, when some time is thought to have passed,
some movement also along with it seems to have taken place. Hence
time is either movement or something that belongs to movement. Since
then it is not movement, it must be the other. 

But what is moved is moved from something to something, and all magnitude
is continuous. Therefore the movement goes with the magnitude. Because
the magnitude is continuous, the movement too must be continuous,
and if the movement, then the time; for the time that has passed is
always thought to be in proportion to the movement. 

The distinction of 'before' and 'after' holds primarily, then, in
place; and there in virtue of relative position. Since then 'before'
and 'after' hold in magnitude, they must hold also in movement, these
corresponding to those. But also in time the distinction of 'before'
and 'after' must hold, for time and movement always correspond with
each other. The 'before' and 'after' in motion is identical in substratum
with motion yet differs from it in definition, and is not identical
with motion. 

But we apprehend time only when we have marked motion, marking it
by 'before' and 'after'; and it is only when we have perceived 'before'
and 'after' in motion that we say that time has elapsed. Now we mark
them by judging that A and B are different, and that some third thing
is intermediate to them. When we think of the extremes as different
from the middle and the mind pronounces that the 'nows' are two, one
before and one after, it is then that we say that there is time, and
this that we say is time. For what is bounded by the 'now' is thought
to be time-we may assume this. 

When, therefore, we perceive the 'now' one, and neither as before
and after in a motion nor as an identity but in relation to a 'before'
and an 'after', no time is thought to have elapsed, because there
has been no motion either. On the other hand, when we do perceive
a 'before' and an 'after', then we say that there is time. For time
is just this-number of motion in respect of 'before' and 'after'.

Hence time is not movement, but only movement in so far as it admits
of enumeration. A proof of this: we discriminate the more or the less
by number, but more or less movement by time. Time then is a kind
of number. (Number, we must note, is used in two senses-both of what
is counted or the countable and also of that with which we count.
Time obviously is what is counted, not that with which we count: there
are different kinds of thing.) Just as motion is a perpetual succession,
so also is time. But every simultaneous time is self-identical; for
the 'now' as a subject is an identity, but it accepts different attributes.
The 'now' measures time, in so far as time involves the 'before and
after'. 

The 'now' in one sense is the same, in another it is not the same.
In so far as it is in succession, it is different (which is just what
its being was supposed to mean), but its substratum is an identity:
for motion, as was said, goes with magnitude, and time, as we maintain,
with motion. Similarly, then, there corresponds to the point the body
which is carried along, and by which we are aware of the motion and
of the 'before and after' involved in it. This is an identical substratum
(whether a point or a stone or something else of the kind), but it
has different attributes as the sophists assume that Coriscus' being
in the Lyceum is a different thing from Coriscus' being in the market-place.
And the body which is carried along is different, in so far as it
is at one time here and at another there. But the 'now' corresponds
to the body that is carried along, as time corresponds to the motion.
For it is by means of the body that is carried along that we become
aware of the 'before and after' the motion, and if we regard these
as countable we get the 'now'. Hence in these also the 'now' as substratum
remains the same (for it is what is before and after in movement),
but what is predicated of it is different; for it is in so far as
the 'before and after' is numerable that we get the 'now'. This is
what is most knowable: for, similarly, motion is known because of
that which is moved, locomotion because of that which is carried.
what is carried is a real thing, the movement is not. Thus what is
called 'now' in one sense is always the same; in another it is not
the same: for this is true also of what is carried. 

Clearly, too, if there were no time, there would be no 'now', and
vice versa. just as the moving body and its locomotion involve each
other mutually, so too do the number of the moving body and the number
of its locomotion. For the number of the locomotion is time, while
the 'now' corresponds to the moving body, and is like the unit of
number. 

Time, then, also is both made continuous by the 'now' and divided
at it. For here too there is a correspondence with the locomotion
and the moving body. For the motion or locomotion is made one by the
thing which is moved, because it is one-not because it is one in its
own nature (for there might be pauses in the movement of such a thing)-but
because it is one in definition: for this determines the movement
as 'before' and 'after'. Here, too there is a correspondence with
the point; for the point also both connects and terminates the length-it
is the beginning of one and the end of another. But when you take
it in this way, using the one point as two, a pause is necessary,
if the same point is to be the beginning and the end. The 'now' on
the other hand, since the body carried is moving, is always different.

Hence time is not number in the sense in which there is 'number' of
the same point because it is beginning and end, but rather as the
extremities of a line form a number, and not as the parts of the line
do so, both for the reason given (for we can use the middle point
as two, so that on that analogy time might stand still), and further
because obviously the 'now' is no part of time nor the section any
part of the movement, any more than the points are parts of the line-for
it is two lines that are parts of one line. 

In so far then as the 'now' is a boundary, it is not time, but an
attribute of it; in so far as it numbers, it is number; for boundaries
belong only to that which they bound, but number (e.g. ten) is the
number of these horses, and belongs also elsewhere. 

It is clear, then, that time is 'number of movement in respect of
the before and after', and is continuous since it is an attribute
of what is continuous. 

Part 12

The smallest number, in the strict sense of the word 'number', is
two. But of number as concrete, sometimes there is a minimum, sometimes
not: e.g. of a 'line', the smallest in respect of multiplicity is
two (or, if you like, one), but in respect of size there is no minimum;
for every line is divided ad infinitum. Hence it is so with time.
In respect of number the minimum is one (or two); in point of extent
there is no minimum. 

It is clear, too, that time is not described as fast or slow, but
as many or few and as long or short. For as continuous it is long
or short and as a number many or few, but it is not fast or slow-any
more than any number with which we number is fast or slow.

Further, there is the same time everywhere at once, but not the same
time before and after, for while the present change is one, the change
which has happened and that which will happen are different. Time
is not number with which we count, but the number of things which
are counted, and this according as it occurs before or after is always
different, for the 'nows' are different. And the number of a hundred
horses and a hundred men is the same, but the things numbered are
different-the horses from the men. Further, as a movement can be one
and the same again and again, so too can time, e.g. a year or a spring
or an autumn. 

Not only do we measure the movement by the time, but also the time
by the movement, because they define each other. The time marks the
movement, since it is its number, and the movement the time. We describe
the time as much or little, measuring it by the movement, just as
we know the number by what is numbered, e.g. the number of the horses
by one horse as the unit. For we know how many horses there are by
the use of the number; and again by using the one horse as unit we
know the number of the horses itself. So it is with the time and the
movement; for we measure the movement by the time and vice versa.
It is natural that this should happen; for the movement goes with
the distance and the time with the movement, because they are quanta
and continuous and divisible. The movement has these attributes because
the distance is of this nature, and the time has them because of the
movement. And we measure both the distance by the movement and the
movement by the distance; for we say that the road is long, if the
journey is long, and that this is long, if the road is long-the time,
too, if the movement, and the movement, if the time. 

Time is a measure of motion and of being moved, and it measures the
motion by determining a motion which will measure exactly the whole
motion, as the cubit does the length by determining an amount which
will measure out the whole. Further 'to be in time' means for movement,
that both it and its essence are measured by time (for simultaneously
it measures both the movement and its essence, and this is what being
in time means for it, that its essence should be measured).

Clearly then 'to be in time' has the same meaning for other things
also, namely, that their being should be measured by time. 'To be
in time' is one of two things: (1) to exist when time exists, (2)
as we say of some things that they are 'in number'. The latter means
either what is a part or mode of number-in general, something which
belongs to number-or that things have a number. 

Now, since time is number, the 'now' and the 'before' and the like
are in time, just as 'unit' and 'odd' and 'even' are in number, i.e.
in the sense that the one set belongs to number, the other to time.
But things are in time as they are in number. If this is so, they
are contained by time as things in place are contained by place.

Plainly, too, to be in time does not mean to co-exist with time, any
more than to be in motion or in place means to co-exist with motion
or place. For if 'to be in something' is to mean this, then all things
will be in anything, and the heaven will be in a grain; for when the
grain is, then also is the heaven. But this is a merely incidental
conjunction, whereas the other is necessarily involved: that which
is in time necessarily involves that there is time when it is, and
that which is in motion that there is motion when it is.

Since what is 'in time' is so in the same sense as what is in number
is so, a time greater than everything in time can be found. So it
is necessary that all the things in time should be contained by time,
just like other things also which are 'in anything', e.g. the things
'in place' by place. 

A thing, then, will be affected by time, just as we are accustomed
to say that time wastes things away, and that all things grow old
through time, and that there is oblivion owing to the lapse of time,
but we do not say the same of getting to know or of becoming young
or fair. For time is by its nature the cause rather of decay, since
it is the number of change, and change removes what is. 

Hence, plainly, things which are always are not, as such, in time,
for they are not contained time, nor is their being measured by time.
A proof of this is that none of them is affected by time, which indicates
that they are not in time. 

Since time is the measure of motion, it will be the measure of rest
too-indirectly. For all rest is in time. For it does not follow that
what is in time is moved, though what is in motion is necessarily
moved. For time is not motion, but 'number of motion': and what is
at rest, also, can be in the number of motion. Not everything that
is not in motion can be said to be 'at rest'-but only that which can
be moved, though it actually is not moved, as was said above.

'To be in number' means that there is a number of the thing, and that
its being is measured by the number in which it is. Hence if a thing
is 'in time' it will be measured by time. But time will measure what
is moved and what is at rest, the one qua moved, the other qua at
rest; for it will measure their motion and rest respectively.

Hence what is moved will not be measurable by the time simply in so
far as it has quantity, but in so far as its motion has quantity.
Thus none of the things which are neither moved nor at rest are in
time: for 'to be in time' is 'to be measured by time', while time
is the measure of motion and rest. 

Plainly, then, neither will everything that does not exist be in time,
i.e. those non-existent things that cannot exist, as the diagonal
cannot be commensurate with the side. 

Generally, if time is directly the measure of motion and indirectly
of other things, it is clear that a thing whose existence is measured
by it will have its existence in rest or motion. Those things therefore
which are subject to perishing and becoming-generally, those which
at one time exist, at another do not-are necessarily in time: for
there is a greater time which will extend both beyond their existence
and beyond the time which measures their existence. Of things which
do not exist but are contained by time some were, e.g. Homer once
was, some will be, e.g. a future event; this depends on the direction
in which time contains them; if on both, they have both modes of existence.
As to such things as it does not contain in any way, they neither
were nor are nor will be. These are those nonexistents whose opposites
always are, as the incommensurability of the diagonal always is-and
this will not be in time. Nor will the commensurability, therefore;
hence this eternally is not, because it is contrary to what eternally
is. A thing whose contrary is not eternal can be and not be, and it
is of such things that there is coming to be and passing away.

Part 13

The 'now' is the link of time, as has been said (for it connects past
and future time), and it is a limit of time (for it is the beginning
of the one and the end of the other). But this is not obvious as it
is with the point, which is fixed. It divides potentially, and in
so far as it is dividing the 'now' is always different, but in so
far as it connects it is always the same, as it is with mathematical
lines. For the intellect it is not always one and the same point,
since it is other and other when one divides the line; but in so far
as it is one, it is the same in every respect. 

So the 'now' also is in one way a potential dividing of time, in another
the termination of both parts, and their unity. And the dividing and
the uniting are the same thing and in the same reference, but in essence
they are not the same. 

So one kind of 'now' is described in this way: another is when the
time is near this kind of 'now'. 'He will come now' because he will
come to-day; 'he has come now' because he came to-day. But the things
in the Iliad have not happened 'now', nor is the flood 'now'-not that
the time from now to them is not continuous, but because they are
not near. 

'At some time' means a time determined in relation to the first of
the two types of 'now', e.g. 'at some time' Troy was taken, and 'at
some time' there will be a flood; for it must be determined with reference
to the 'now'. There will thus be a determinate time from this 'now'
to that, and there was such in reference to the past event. But if
there be no time which is not 'sometime', every time will be determined.

Will time then fail? Surely not, if motion always exists. Is time
then always different or does the same time recur? Clearly time is,
in the same way as motion is. For if one and the same motion sometimes
recurs, it will be one and the same time, and if not, not.

Since the 'now' is an end and a beginning of time, not of the same
time however, but the end of that which is past and the beginning
of that which is to come, it follows that, as the circle has its convexity
and its concavity, in a sense, in the same thing, so time is always
at a beginning and at an end. And for this reason it seems to be always
different; for the 'now' is not the beginning and the end of the same
thing; if it were, it would be at the same time and in the same respect
two opposites. And time will not fail; for it is always at a beginning.

'Presently' or 'just' refers to the part of future time which is near
the indivisible present 'now' ('When do you walk? 'Presently', because
the time in which he is going to do so is near), and to the part of
past time which is not far from the 'now' ('When do you walk?' 'I
have just been walking'). But to say that Troy has just been taken-we
do not say that, because it is too far from the 'now'. 'Lately', too,
refers to the part of past time which is near the present 'now'. 'When
did you go?' 'Lately', if the time is near the existing now. 'Long
ago' refers to the distant past. 

'Suddenly' refers to what has departed from its former condition in
a time imperceptible because of its smallness; but it is the nature
of all change to alter things from their former condition. In time
all things come into being and pass away; for which reason some called
it the wisest of all things, but the Pythagorean Paron called it the
most stupid, because in it we also forget; and his was the truer view.
It is clear then that it must be in itself, as we said before, the
condition of destruction rather than of coming into being (for change,
in itself, makes things depart from their former condition), and only
incidentally of coming into being, and of being. A sufficient evidence
of this is that nothing comes into being without itself moving somehow
and acting, but a thing can be destroyed even if it does not move
at all. And this is what, as a rule, we chiefly mean by a thing's
being destroyed by time. Still, time does not work even this change;
even this sort of change takes place incidentally in time.

We have stated, then, that time exists and what it is, and in how
many senses we speak of the 'now', and what 'at some time', 'lately',
'presently' or 'just', 'long ago', and 'suddenly' mean. 

Part 14

These distinctions having been drawn, it is evident that every change
and everything that moves is in time; for the distinction of faster
and slower exists in reference to all change, since it is found in
every instance. In the phrase 'moving faster' I refer to that which
changes before another into the condition in question, when it moves
over the same interval and with a regular movement; e.g. in the case
of locomotion, if both things move along the circumference of a circle,
or both along a straight line; and similarly in all other cases. But
what is before is in time; for we say 'before' and 'after' with reference
to the distance from the 'now', and the 'now' is the boundary of the
past and the future; so that since 'nows' are in time, the before
and the after will be in time too; for in that in which the 'now'
is, the distance from the 'now' will also be. But 'before' is used
contrariwise with reference to past and to future time; for in the
past we call 'before' what is farther from the 'now', and 'after'
what is nearer, but in the future we call the nearer 'before' and
the farther 'after'. So that since the 'before' is in time, and every
movement involves a 'before', evidently every change and every movement
is in time. 

It is also worth considering how time can be related to the soul;
and why time is thought to be in everything, both in earth and in
sea and in heaven. Is because it is an attribute, or state, or movement
(since it is the number of movement) and all these things are movable
(for they are all in place), and time and movement are together, both
in respect of potentiality and in respect of actuality? 

Whether if soul did not exist time would exist or not, is a question
that may fairly be asked; for if there cannot be some one to count
there cannot be anything that can be counted, so that evidently there
cannot be number; for number is either what has been, or what can
be, counted. But if nothing but soul, or in soul reason, is qualified
to count, there would not be time unless there were soul, but only
that of which time is an attribute, i.e. if movement can exist without
soul, and the before and after are attributes of movement, and time
is these qua numerable. 

One might also raise the question what sort of movement time is the
number of. Must we not say 'of any kind'? For things both come into
being in time and pass away, and grow, and are altered in time, and
are moved locally; thus it is of each movement qua movement that time
is the number. And so it is simply the number of continuous movement,
not of any particular kind of it. 

But other things as well may have been moved now, and there would
be a number of each of the two movements. Is there another time, then,
and will there be two equal times at once? Surely not. For a time
that is both equal and simultaneous is one and the same time, and
even those that are not simultaneous are one in kind; for if there
were dogs, and horses, and seven of each, it would be the same number.
So, too, movements that have simultaneous limits have the same time,
yet the one may in fact be fast and the other not, and one may be
locomotion and the other alteration; still the time of the two changes
is the same if their number also is equal and simultaneous; and for
this reason, while the movements are different and separate, the time
is everywhere the same, because the number of equal and simultaneous
movements is everywhere one and the same. 

Now there is such a thing as locomotion, and in locomotion there is
included circular movement, and everything is measured by some one
thing homogeneous with it, units by a unit, horses by a horse, and
similarly times by some definite time, and, as we said, time is measured
by motion as well as motion by time (this being so because by a motion
definite in time the quantity both of the motion and of the time is
measured): if, then, what is first is the measure of everything homogeneous
with it, regular circular motion is above all else the measure, because
the number of this is the best known. Now neither alteration nor increase
nor coming into being can be regular, but locomotion can be. This
also is why time is thought to be the movement of the sphere, viz.
because the other movements are measured by this, and time by this
movement. 

This also explains the common saying that human affairs form a circle,
and that there is a circle in all other things that have a natural
movement and coming into being and passing away. This is because all
other things are discriminated by time, and end and begin as though
conforming to a cycle; for even time itself is thought to be a circle.
And this opinion again is held because time is the measure of this
kind of locomotion and is itself measured by such. So that to say
that the things that come into being form a circle is to say that
there is a circle of time; and this is to say that it is measured
by the circular movement; for apart from the measure nothing else
to be measured is observed; the whole is just a plurality of measures.

It is said rightly, too, that the number of the sheep and of the dogs
is the same number if the two numbers are equal, but not the same
decad or the same ten; just as the equilateral and the scalene are
not the same triangle, yet they are the same figure, because they
are both triangles. For things are called the same so-and-so if they
do not differ by a differentia of that thing, but not if they do;
e.g. triangle differs from triangle by a differentia of triangle,
therefore they are different triangles; but they do not differ by
a differentia of figure, but are in one and the same division of it.
For a figure of the one kind is a circle and a figure of another kind
of triangle, and a triangle of one kind is equilateral and a triangle
of another kind scalene. They are the same figure, then, that, triangle,
but not the same triangle. Therefore the number of two groups also-is
the same number (for their number does not differ by a differentia
of number), but it is not the same decad; for the things of which
it is asserted differ; one group are dogs, and the other horses.

We have now discussed time-both time itself and the matters appropriate
to the consideration of it. 



BOOK V

Part 1 

Everything which changes does so in one of three senses. It may change
(1) accidentally, as for instance when we say that something musical
walks, that which walks being something in which aptitude for music
is an accident. Again (2) a thing is said without qualification to
change because something belonging to it changes, i.e. in statements
which refer to part of the thing in question: thus the body is restored
to health because the eye or the chest, that is to say a part of the
whole body, is restored to health. And above all there is (3) the
case of a thing which is in motion neither accidentally nor in respect
of something else belonging to it, but in virtue of being itself directly
in motion. Here we have a thing which is essentially movable: and
that which is so is a different thing according to the particular
variety of motion: for instance it may be a thing capable of alteration:
and within the sphere of alteration it is again a different thing
according as it is capable of being restored to health or capable
of being heated. And there are the same distinctions in the case of
the mover: (1) one thing causes motion accidentally, (2) another partially
(because something belonging to it causes motion), (3) another of
itself directly, as, for instance, the physician heals, the hand strikes.
We have, then, the following factors: (a) on the one hand that which
directly causes motion, and (b) on the other hand that which is in
motion: further, we have (c) that in which motion takes place, namely
time, and (distinct from these three, d) that from which and (e)
that to which it proceeds: for every motion proceeds from something
and to something, that which is directly in motion being distinct
from that to which it is in motion and that from which it is in motion:
for instance, we may take the three things 'wood', 'hot', and 'cold',
of which the first is that which is in motion, the second is that
to which the motion proceeds, and the third is that from which it
proceeds. This being so, it is clear that the motion is in the wood,
not in its form: for the motion is neither caused nor experienced
by the form or the place or the quantity. So we are left with a mover,
a moved, and a goal of motion. I do not include the starting-point
of motion: for it is the goal rather than the starting-point of motion
that gives its name to a particular process of change. Thus 'perishing'
is change to not-being, though it is also true that that that which
perishes changes from being: and 'becoming' is change to being, though
it is also change from not-being. 

Now a definition of motion has been given above, from which it will
be seen that every goal of motion, whether it be a form, an affection,
or a place, is immovable, as, for instance, knowledge and heat. Here,
however, a difficulty may be raised. Affections, it may be said, are
motions, and whiteness is an affection: thus there may be change to
a motion. To this we may reply that it is not whiteness but whitening
that is a motion. Here also the same distinctions are to be observed:
a goal of motion may be so accidentally, or partially and with reference
to something other than itself, or directly and with no reference
to anything else: for instance, a thing which is becoming white changes
accidentally to an object of thought, the colour being only accidentally
the object of thought; it changes to colour, because white is a part
of colour, or to Europe, because Athens is a part of Europe; but it
changes essentially to white colour. It is now clear in what sense
a thing is in motion essentially, accidentally, or in respect of something
other than itself, and in what sense the phrase 'itself directly'
is used in the case both of the mover and of the moved: and it is
also clear that the motion is not in the form but in that which is
in motion, that is to say 'the movable in activity'. Now accidental
change we may leave out of account: for it is to be found in everything,
at any time, and in any respect. Change which is not accidental on
the other hand is not to be found in everything, but only in contraries,
in things intermediate contraries, and in contradictories, as may
be proved by induction. An intermediate may be a starting-point of
change, since for the purposes of the change it serves as contrary
to either of two contraries: for the intermediate is in a sense the
extremes. Hence we speak of the intermediate as in a sense a contrary
relatively to the extremes and of either extreme as a contrary relatively
to the intermediate: for instance, the central note is low relatively-to
the highest and high relatively to the lowest, and grey is light relatively
to black and dark relatively to white. 

And since every change is from something to something-as the word
itself (metabole) indicates, implying something 'after' (meta) something
else, that is to say something earlier and something later-that which
changes must change in one of four ways: from subject to subject,
from subject to nonsubject, from non-subject to subject, or from non-subject
to non-subject, where by 'subject' I mean what is affirmatively expressed.
So it follows necessarily from what has been said above that there
are only three kinds of change, that from subject to subject, that
from subject to non-subject, and that from non-subject to subject:
for the fourth conceivable kind, that from non-subject to nonsubject,
is not change, as in that case there is no opposition either of contraries
or of contradictories. 

Now change from non-subject to subject, the relation being that of
contradiction, is 'coming to be'-'unqualified coming to be' when the
change takes place in an unqualified way, 'particular coming to be'
when the change is change in a particular character: for instance,
a change from not-white to white is a coming to be of the particular
thing, white, while change from unqualified not-being to being is
coming to be in an unqualified way, in respect of which we say that
a thing 'comes to be' without qualification, not that it 'comes to
be' some particular thing. Change from subject to non-subject is 'perishing'-'unqualified
perishing' when the change is from being to not-being, 'particular
perishing' when the change is to the opposite negation, the distinction
being the same as that made in the case of coming to be.

Now the expression 'not-being' is used in several senses: and there
can be motion neither of that which 'is not' in respect of the affirmation
or negation of a predicate, nor of that which 'is not' in the sense
that it only potentially 'is', that is to say the opposite of that
which actually 'is' in an unqualified sense: for although that which
is 'not-white' or 'not-good' may nevertheless he in motion accidentally
(for example that which is 'not-white' might be a man), yet that which
is without qualification 'not-so-and-so' cannot in any sense be in
motion: therefore it is impossible for that which is not to be in
motion. This being so, it follows that 'becoming' cannot be a motion:
for it is that which 'is not' that 'becomes'. For however true it
may be that it accidentally 'becomes', it is nevertheless correct
to say that it is that which 'is not' that in an unqualified sense
'becomes'. And similarly it is impossible for that which 'is not'
to be at rest. 

There are these difficulties, then, in the way of the assumption that
that which 'is not' can be in motion: and it may be further objected
that, whereas everything which is in motion is in space, that which
'is not' is not in space: for then it would be somewhere.

So, too, 'perishing' is not a motion: for a motion has for its contrary
either another motion or rest, whereas 'perishing' is the contrary
of 'becoming'. 

Since, then, every motion is a kind of change, and there are only
the three kinds of change mentioned above, and since of these three
those which take the form of 'becoming' and 'perishing', that is to
say those which imply a relation of contradiction, are not motions:
it necessarily follows that only change from subject to subject is
motion. And every such subject is either a contrary or an intermediate
(for a privation may be allowed to rank as a contrary) and can be
affirmatively expressed, as naked, toothless, or black. If, then,
the categories are severally distinguished as Being, Quality, Place,
Time, Relation, Quantity, and Activity or Passivity, it necessarily
follows that there are three kinds of motion-qualitative, quantitative,
and local. 

Part 2

In respect of Substance there is no motion, because Substance has
no contrary among things that are. Nor is there motion in respect
of Relation: for it may happen that when one correlative changes,
the other, although this does not itself change, is no longer applicable,
so that in these cases the motion is accidental. Nor is there motion
in respect of Agent and Patient-in fact there can never be motion
of mover and moved, because there cannot be motion of motion or becoming
of becoming or in general change of change. 

For in the first place there are two senses in which motion of motion
is conceivable. (1) The motion of which there is motion might be conceived
as subject; e.g. a man is in motion because he changes from fair to
dark. Can it be that in this sense motion grows hot or cold, or changes
place, or increases or decreases? Impossible: for change is not a
subject. Or (2) can there be motion of motion in the sense that some
other subject changes from a change to another mode of being, as e.g.
a man changes from falling ill to getting well? Even this is possible
only in an accidental sense. For, whatever the subject may be, movement
is change from one form to another. (And the same holds good of becoming
and perishing, except that in these processes we have a change to
a particular kind of opposite, while the other, motion, is a change
to a different kind.) So, if there is to be motion of motion, that
which is changing from health to sickness must simultaneously be changing
from this very change to another. It is clear, then, that by the time
that it has become sick, it must also have changed to whatever may
be the other change concerned (for that it should be at rest, though
logically possible, is excluded by the theory). Moreover this other
can never be any casual change, but must be a change from something
definite to some other definite thing. So in this case it must be
the opposite change, viz. convalescence. It is only accidentally that
there can be change of change, e.g. there is a change from remembering
to forgetting only because the subject of this change changes at one
time to knowledge, at another to ignorance. 

In the second place, if there is to be change of change and becoming
of becoming, we shall have an infinite regress. Thus if one of a series
of changes is to be a change of change, the preceding change must
also be so: e.g. if simple becoming was ever in process of becoming,
then that which was becoming simple becoming was also in process of
becoming, so that we should not yet have arrived at what was in process
of simple becoming but only at what was already in process of becoming
in process of becoming. And this again was sometime in process of
becoming, so that even then we should not have arrived at what was
in process of simple becoming. And since in an infinite series there
is no first term, here there will be no first stage and therefore
no following stage either. On this hypothesis, then, nothing can become
or be moved or change. 

Thirdly, if a thing is capable of any particular motion, it is also
capable of the corresponding contrary motion or the corresponding
coming to rest, and a thing that is capable of becoming is also capable
of perishing: consequently, if there be becoming of becoming, that
which is in process of becoming is in process of perishing at the
very moment when it has reached the stage of becoming: since it cannot
be in process of perishing when it is just beginning to become or
after it has ceased to become: for that which is in process of perishing
must be in existence. 

Fourthly, there must be a substrate underlying all processes of becoming
and changing. What can this be in the present case? It is either the
body or the soul that undergoes alteration: what is it that correspondingly
becomes motion or becoming? And again what is the goal of their motion?
It must be the motion or becoming of something from something to something
else. But in what sense can this be so? For the becoming of learning
cannot be learning: so neither can the becoming of becoming be becoming,
nor can the becoming of any process be that process. 

Finally, since there are three kinds of motion, the substratum and
the goal of motion must be one or other of these, e.g. locomotion
will have to be altered or to be locally moved. 

To sum up, then, since everything that is moved is moved in one of
three ways, either accidentally, or partially, or essentially, change
can change only accidentally, as e.g. when a man who is being restored
to health runs or learns: and accidental change we have long ago decided
to leave out of account. 

Since, then, motion can belong neither to Being nor to Relation nor
to Agent and Patient, it remains that there can be motion only in
respect of Quality, Quantity, and Place: for with each of these we
have a pair of contraries. Motion in respect of Quality let us call
alteration, a general designation that is used to include both contraries:
and by Quality I do not here mean a property of substance (in that
sense that which constitutes a specific distinction is a quality)
but a passive quality in virtue of which a thing is said to be acted
on or to be incapable of being acted on. Motion in respect of Quantity
has no name that includes both contraries, but it is called increase
or decrease according as one or the other is designated: that is to
say motion in the direction of complete magnitude is increase, motion
in the contrary direction is decrease. Motion in respect of Place
has no name either general or particular: but we may designate it
by the general name of locomotion, though strictly the term 'locomotion'
is applicable to things that change their place only when they have
not the power to come to a stand, and to things that do not move themselves
locally. 

Change within the same kind from a lesser to a greater or from a greater
to a lesser degree is alteration: for it is motion either from a contrary
or to a contrary, whether in an unqualified or in a qualified sense:
for change to a lesser degree of a quality will be called change to
the contrary of that quality, and change to a greater degree of a
quality will be regarded as change from the contrary of that quality
to the quality itself. It makes no difference whether the change be
qualified or unqualified, except that in the former case the contraries
will have to be contrary to one another only in a qualified sense:
and a thing's possessing a quality in a greater or in a lesser degree
means the presence or absence in it of more or less of the opposite
quality. It is now clear, then, that there are only these three kinds
of motion. 

The term 'immovable' we apply in the first place to that which is
absolutely incapable of being moved (just as we correspondingly apply
the term invisible to sound); in the second place to that which is
moved with difficulty after a long time or whose movement is slow
at the start-in fact, what we describe as hard to move; and in the
third place to that which is naturally designed for and capable of
motion, but is not in motion when, where, and as it naturally would
be so. This last is the only kind of immovable thing of which I use
the term 'being at rest': for rest is contrary to motion, so that
rest will be negation of motion in that which is capable of admitting
motion. 

The foregoing remarks are sufficient to explain the essential nature
of motion and rest, the number of kinds of change, and the different
varieties of motion. 

Part 3

Let us now proceed to define the terms 'together' and 'apart', 'in
contact', 'between', 'in succession', 'contiguous', and 'continuous',
and to show in what circumstances each of these terms is naturally
applicable. 

Things are said to be together in place when they are in one place
(in the strictest sense of the word 'place') and to be apart when
they are in different places. 

Things are said to be in contact when their extremities are together.

That which a changing thing, if it changes continuously in a natural
manner, naturally reaches before it reaches that to which it changes
last, is between. Thus 'between' implies the presence of at least
three things: for in a process of change it is the contrary that is
'last': and a thing is moved continuously if it leaves no gap or only
the smallest possible gap in the material-not in the time (for a gap
in the time does not prevent things having a 'between', while, on
the other hand, there is nothing to prevent the highest note sounding
immediately after the lowest) but in the material in which the motion
takes place. This is manifestly true not only in local changes but
in every other kind as well. (Now every change implies a pair of opposites,
and opposites may be either contraries or contradictories; since then
contradiction admits of no mean term, it is obvious that 'between'
must imply a pair of contraries) That is locally contrary which is
most distant in a straight line: for the shortest line is definitely
limited, and that which is definitely limited constitutes a measure.

A thing is 'in succession' when it is after the beginning in position
or in form or in some other respect in which it is definitely so regarded,
and when further there is nothing of the same kind as itself between
it and that to which it is in succession, e.g. a line or lines if
it is a line, a unit or units if it is a unit, a house if it is a
house (there is nothing to prevent something of a different kind being
between). For that which is in succession is in succession to a particular
thing, and is something posterior: for one is not 'in succession'
to two, nor is the first day of the month to be second: in each case
the latter is 'in succession' to the former. 

A thing that is in succession and touches is 'contiguous'. The 'continuous'
is a subdivision of the contiguous: things are called continuous when
the touching limits of each become one and the same and are, as the
word implies, contained in each other: continuity is impossible if
these extremities are two. This definition makes it plain that continuity
belongs to things that naturally in virtue of their mutual contact
form a unity. And in whatever way that which holds them together is
one, so too will the whole be one, e.g. by a rivet or glue or contact
or organic union. 

It is obvious that of these terms 'in succession' is first in order
of analysis: for that which touches is necessarily in succession,
but not everything that is in succession touches: and so succession
is a property of things prior in definition, e.g. numbers, while contact
is not. And if there is continuity there is necessarily contact, but
if there is contact, that alone does not imply continuity: for the
extremities of things may be 'together' without necessarily being
one: but they cannot be one without being necessarily together. So
natural junction is last in coming to be: for the extremities must
necessarily come into contact if they are to be naturally joined:
but things that are in contact are not all naturally joined, while
there is no contact clearly there is no natural junction either. Hence,
if as some say 'point' and 'unit' have an independent existence of
their own, it is impossible for the two to be identical: for points
can touch while units can only be in succession. Moreover, there can
always be something between points (for all lines are intermediate
between points), whereas it is not necessary that there should possibly
be anything between units: for there can be nothing between the numbers
one and two. 

We have now defined what is meant by 'together' and 'apart', 'contact',
'between' and 'in succession', 'contiguous' and 'continuous': and
we have shown in what circumstances each of these terms is applicable.

Part 4

There are many senses in which motion is said to be 'one': for we
use the term 'one' in many senses. 

Motion is one generically according to the different categories to
which it may be assigned: thus any locomotion is one generically with
any other locomotion, whereas alteration is different generically
from locomotion. 

Motion is one specifically when besides being one generically it also
takes place in a species incapable of subdivision: e.g. colour has
specific differences: therefore blackening and whitening differ specifically;
but at all events every whitening will be specifically the same with
every other whitening and every blackening with every other blackening.
But white is not further subdivided by specific differences: hence
any whitening is specifically one with any other whitening. Where
it happens that the genus is at the same time a species, it is clear
that the motion will then in a sense be one specifically though not
in an unqualified sense: learning is an example of this, knowledge
being on the one hand a species of apprehension and on the other hand
a genus including the various knowledges. A difficulty, however, may
be raised as to whether a motion is specifically one when the same
thing changes from the same to the same, e.g. when one point changes
again and again from a particular place to a particular place: if
this motion is specifically one, circular motion will be the same
as rectilinear motion, and rolling the same as walking. But is not
this difficulty removed by the principle already laid down that if
that in which the motion takes place is specifically different (as
in the present instance the circular path is specifically different
from the straight) the motion itself is also different? We have explained,
then, what is meant by saying that motion is one generically or one
specifically. 

Motion is one in an unqualified sense when it is one essentially or
numerically: and the following distinctions will make clear what this
kind of motion is. There are three classes of things in connexion
with which we speak of motion, the 'that which', the 'that in which',
and the 'that during which'. I mean that there must he something that
is in motion, e.g. a man or gold, and it must be in motion in something,
e.g. a place or an affection, and during something, for all motion
takes place during a time. Of these three it is the thing in which
the motion takes place that makes it one generically or specifically,
it is the thing moved that makes the motion one in subject, and it
is the time that makes it consecutive: but it is the three together
that make it one without qualification: to effect this, that in which
the motion takes place (the species) must be one and incapable of
subdivision, that during which it takes place (the time) must be one
and unintermittent, and that which is in motion must be one-not in
an accidental sense (i.e. it must be one as the white that blackens
is one or Coriscus who walks is one, not in the accidental sense in
which Coriscus and white may be one), nor merely in virtue of community
of nature (for there might be a case of two men being restored to
health at the same time in the same way, e.g. from inflammation of
the eye, yet this motion is not really one, but only specifically
one). 

Suppose, however, that Socrates undergoes an alteration specifically
the same but at one time and again at another: in this case if it
is possible for that which ceased to be again to come into being and
remain numerically the same, then this motion too will be one: otherwise
it will be the same but not one. And akin to this difficulty there
is another; viz. is health one? and generally are the states and affections
in bodies severally one in essence although (as is clear) the things
that contain them are obviously in motion and in flux? Thus if a person's
health at daybreak and at the present moment is one and the same,
why should not this health be numerically one with that which he recovers
after an interval? The same argument applies in each case. There is,
however, we may answer, this difference: that if the states are two
then it follows simply from this fact that the activities must also
in point of number be two (for only that which is numerically one
can give rise to an activity that is numerically one), but if the
state is one, this is not in itself enough to make us regard the activity
also as one: for when a man ceases walking, the walking no longer
is, but it will again be if he begins to walk again. But, be this
as it may, if in the above instance the health is one and the same,
then it must be possible for that which is one and the same to come
to be and to cease to be many times. However, these difficulties lie
outside our present inquiry. 

Since every motion is continuous, a motion that is one in an unqualified
sense must (since every motion is divisible) be continuous, and a
continuous motion must be one. There will not be continuity between
any motion and any other indiscriminately any more than there is between
any two things chosen at random in any other sphere: there can be
continuity only when the extremities of the two things are one. Now
some things have no extremities at all: and the extremities of others
differ specifically although we give them the same name of 'end':
how should e.g. the 'end' of a line and the 'end' of walking touch
or come to be one? Motions that are not the same either specifically
or generically may, it is true, be consecutive (e.g. a man may run
and then at once fall ill of a fever), and again, in the torch-race
we have consecutive but not continuous locomotion: for according to
our definition there can be continuity only when the ends of the two
things are one. Hence motions may be consecutive or successive in
virtue of the time being continuous, but there can be continuity only
in virtue of the motions themselves being continuous, that is when
the end of each is one with the end of the other. Motion, therefore,
that is in an unqualified sense continuous and one must be specifically
the same, of one thing, and in one time. Unity is required in respect
of time in order that there may be no interval of immobility, for
where there is intermission of motion there must be rest, and a motion
that includes intervals of rest will be not one but many, so that
a motion that is interrupted by stationariness is not one or continuous,
and it is so interrupted if there is an interval of time. And though
of a motion that is not specifically one (even if the time is unintermittent)
the time is one, the motion is specifically different, and so cannot
really be one, for motion that is one must be specifically one, though
motion that is specifically one is not necessarily one in an unqualified
sense. We have now explained what we mean when we call a motion one
without qualification. 

Further, a motion is also said to be one generically, specifically,
or essentially when it is complete, just as in other cases completeness
and wholeness are characteristics of what is one: and sometimes a
motion even if incomplete is said to be one, provided only that it
is continuous. 

And besides the cases already mentioned there is another in which
a motion is said to be one, viz. when it is regular: for in a sense
a motion that is irregular is not regarded as one, that title belonging
rather to that which is regular, as a straight line is regular, the
irregular being as such divisible. But the difference would seem to
be one of degree. In every kind of motion we may have regularity or
irregularity: thus there may be regular alteration, and locomotion
in a regular path, e.g. in a circle or on a straight line, and it
is the same with regard to increase and decrease. The difference that
makes a motion irregular is sometimes to be found in its path: thus
a motion cannot be regular if its path is an irregular magnitude,
e.g. a broken line, a spiral, or any other magnitude that is not such
that any part of it taken at random fits on to any other that may
be chosen. Sometimes it is found neither in the place nor in the time
nor in the goal but in the manner of the motion: for in some cases
the motion is differentiated by quickness and slowness: thus if its
velocity is uniform a motion is regular, if not it is irregular. So
quickness and slowness are not species of motion nor do they constitute
specific differences of motion, because this distinction occurs in
connexion with all the distinct species of motion. The same is true
of heaviness and lightness when they refer to the same thing: e.g.
they do not specifically distinguish earth from itself or fire from
itself. Irregular motion, therefore, while in virtue of being continuous
it is one, is so in a lesser degree, as is the case with locomotion
in a broken line: and a lesser degree of something always means an
admixture of its contrary. And since every motion that is one can
be both regular and irregular, motions that are consecutive but not
specifically the same cannot be one and continuous: for how should
a motion composed of alteration and locomotion be regular? If a motion
is to be regular its parts ought to fit one another. 

Part 5

We have further to determine what motions are contrary to each other,
and to determine similarly how it is with rest. And we have first
to decide whether contrary motions are motions respectively from and
to the same thing, e.g. a motion from health and a motion to health
(where the opposition, it would seem, is of the same kind as that
between coming to be and ceasing to be); or motions respectively from
contraries, e.g. a motion from health and a motion from disease; or
motions respectively to contraries, e.g. a motion to health and a
motion to disease; or motions respectively from a contrary and to
the opposite contrary, e.g. a motion from health and a motion to disease;
or motions respectively from a contrary to the opposite contrary and
from the latter to the former, e.g. a motion from health to disease
and a motion from disease to health: for motions must be contrary
to one another in one or more of these ways, as there is no other
way in which they can be opposed. 

Now motions respectively from a contrary and to the opposite contrary,
e.g. a motion from health and a motion to disease, are not contrary
motions: for they are one and the same. (Yet their essence is not
the same, just as changing from health is different from changing
to disease.) Nor are motion respectively from a contrary and from
the opposite contrary contrary motions, for a motion from a contrary
is at the same time a motion to a contrary or to an intermediate (of
this, however, we shall speak later), but changing to a contrary rather
than changing from a contrary would seem to be the cause of the contrariety
of motions, the latter being the loss, the former the gain, of contrariness.
Moreover, each several motion takes its name rather from the goal
than from the starting-point of change, e.g. motion to health we call
convalescence, motion to disease sickening. Thus we are left with
motions respectively to contraries, and motions respectively to contraries
from the opposite contraries. Now it would seem that motions to contraries
are at the same time motions from contraries (though their essence
may not be the same; 'to health' is distinct, I mean, from 'from disease',
and 'from health' from 'to disease'). 

Since then change differs from motion (motion being change from a
particular subject to a particular subject), it follows that contrary
motions are motions respectively from a contrary to the opposite contrary
and from the latter to the former, e.g. a motion from health to disease
and a motion from disease to health. Moreover, the consideration of
particular examples will also show what kinds of processes are generally
recognized as contrary: thus falling ill is regarded as contrary to
recovering one's health, these processes having contrary goals, and
being taught as contrary to being led into error by another, it being
possible to acquire error, like knowledge, either by one's own agency
or by that of another. Similarly we have upward locomotion and downward
locomotion, which are contrary lengthwise, locomotion to the right
and locomotion to the left, which are contrary breadthwise, and forward
locomotion and backward locomotion, which too are contraries. On the
other hand, a process simply to a contrary, e.g. that denoted by the
expression 'becoming white', where no starting-point is specified,
is a change but not a motion. And in all cases of a thing that has
no contrary we have as contraries change from and change to the same
thing. Thus coming to be is contrary to ceasing to be, and losing
to gaining. But these are changes and not motions. And wherever a
pair of contraries admit of an intermediate, motions to that intermediate
must be held to be in a sense motions to one or other of the contraries:
for the intermediate serves as a contrary for the purposes of the
motion, in whichever direction the change may be, e.g. grey in a motion
from grey to white takes the place of black as starting-point, in
a motion from white to grey it takes the place of black as goal, and
in a motion from black to grey it takes the place of white as goal:
for the middle is opposed in a sense to either of the extremes, as
has been said above. Thus we see that two motions are contrary to
each other only when one is a motion from a contrary to the opposite
contrary and the other is a motion from the latter to the former.

Part 6

But since a motion appears to have contrary to it not only another
motion but also a state of rest, we must determine how this is so.
A motion has for its contrary in the strict sense of the term another
motion, but it also has for an opposite a state of rest (for rest
is the privation of motion and the privation of anything may be called
its contrary), and motion of one kind has for its opposite rest of
that kind, e.g. local motion has local rest. This statement, however,
needs further qualification: there remains the question, is the opposite
of remaining at a particular place motion from or motion to that place?
It is surely clear that since there are two subjects between which
motion takes place, motion from one of these (A) to its contrary (B)
has for its opposite remaining in A while the reverse motion has for
its opposite remaining in B. At the same time these two are also contrary
to each other: for it would be absurd to suppose that there are contrary
motions and not opposite states of rest. States of rest in contraries
are opposed. To take an example, a state of rest in health is (1)
contrary to a state of rest in disease, and (2) the motion to which
it is contrary is that from health to disease. For (2) it would be
absurd that its contrary motion should be that from disease to health,
since motion to that in which a thing is at rest is rather a coming
to rest, the coming to rest being found to come into being simultaneously
with the motion; and one of these two motions it must be. And (1)
rest in whiteness is of course not contrary to rest in health.

Of all things that have no contraries there are opposite changes (viz.
change from the thing and change to the thing, e.g. change from being
and change to being), but no motion. So, too, of such things there
is no remaining though there is absence of change. Should there be
a particular subject, absence of change in its being will be contrary
to absence of change in its not-being. And here a difficulty may be
raised: if not-being is not a particular something, what is it, it
may be asked, that is contrary to absence of change in a thing's being?
and is this absence of change a state of rest? If it is, then either
it is not true that every state of rest is contrary to a motion or
else coming to be and ceasing to be are motion. It is clear then that,
since we exclude these from among motions, we must not say that this
absence of change is a state of rest: we must say that it is similar
to a state of rest and call it absence of change. And it will have
for its contrary either nothing or absence of change in the thing's
not-being, or the ceasing to be of the thing: for such ceasing to
be is change from it and the thing's coming to be is change to it.

Again, a further difficulty may be raised. How is it, it may be asked,
that whereas in local change both remaining and moving may be natural
or unnatural, in the other changes this is not so? e.g. alteration
is not now natural and now unnatural, for convalescence is no more
natural or unnatural than falling ill, whitening no more natural or
unnatural than blackening; so, too, with increase and decrease: these
are not contrary to each other in the sense that either of them is
natural while the other is unnatural, nor is one increase contrary
to another in this sense; and the same account may be given of becoming
and perishing: it is not true that becoming is natural and perishing
unnatural (for growing old is natural), nor do we observe one becoming
to be natural and another unnatural. We answer that if what happens
under violence is unnatural, then violent perishing is unnatural and
as such contrary to natural perishing. Are there then also some becomings
that are violent and not the result of natural necessity, and are
therefore contrary to natural becomings, and violent increases and
decreases, e.g. the rapid growth to maturity of profligates and the
rapid ripening of seeds even when not packed close in the earth? And
how is it with alterations? Surely just the same: we may say that
some alterations are violent while others are natural, e.g. patients
alter naturally or unnaturally according as they throw off fevers
on the critical days or not. But, it may be objected, then we shall
have perishings contrary to one another, not to becoming. Certainly:
and why should not this in a sense be so? Thus it is so if one perishing
is pleasant and another painful: and so one perishing will be contrary
to another not in an unqualified sense, but in so far as one has this
quality and the other that. 

Now motions and states of rest universally exhibit contrariety in
the manner described above, e.g. upward motion and rest above are
respectively contrary to downward motion and rest below, these being
instances of local contrariety; and upward locomotion belongs naturally
to fire and downward to earth, i.e. the locomotions of the two are
contrary to each other. And again, fire moves up naturally and down
unnaturally: and its natural motion is certainly contrary to its unnatural
motion. Similarly with remaining: remaining above is contrary to motion
from above downwards, and to earth this remaining comes unnaturally,
this motion naturally. So the unnatural remaining of a thing is contrary
to its natural motion, just as we find a similar contrariety in the
motion of the same thing: one of its motions, the upward or the downward,
will be natural, the other unnatural. 

Here, however, the question arises, has every state of rest that is
not permanent a becoming, and is this becoming a coming to a standstill?
If so, there must be a becoming of that which is at rest unnaturally,
e.g. of earth at rest above: and therefore this earth during the time
that it was being carried violently upward was coming to a standstill.
But whereas the velocity of that which comes to a standstill seems
always to increase, the velocity of that which is carried violently
seems always to decrease: so it will he in a state of rest without
having become so. Moreover 'coming to a standstill' is generally recognized
to be identical or at least concomitant with the locomotion of a thing
to its proper place. 

There is also another difficulty involved in the view that remaining
in a particular place is contrary to motion from that place. For when
a thing is moving from or discarding something, it still appears to
have that which is being discarded, so that if a state of rest is
itself contrary to the motion from the state of rest to its contrary,
the contraries rest and motion will be simultaneously predicable of
the same thing. May we not say, however, that in so far as the thing
is still stationary it is in a state of rest in a qualified sense?
For, in fact, whenever a thing is in motion, part of it is at the
starting-point while part is at the goal to which it is changing:
and consequently a motion finds its true contrary rather in another
motion than in a state of rest. 

With regard to motion and rest, then, we have now explained in what
sense each of them is one and under what conditions they exhibit contrariety.

[With regard to coming to a standstill the question may be raised
whether there is an opposite state of rest to unnatural as well as
to natural motions. It would be absurd if this were not the case:
for a thing may remain still merely under violence: thus we shall
have a thing being in a non-permanent state of rest without having
become so. But it is clear that it must be the case: for just as there
is unnatural motion, so, too, a thing may be in an unnatural state
of rest. Further, some things have a natural and an unnatural motion,
e.g. fire has a natural upward motion and an unnatural downward motion:
is it, then, this unnatural downward motion or is it the natural downward
motion of earth that is contrary to the natural upward motion? Surely
it is clear that both are contrary to it though not in the same sense:
the natural motion of earth is contrary inasmuch as the motion of
fire is also natural, whereas the upward motion of fire as being natural
is contrary to the downward motion of fire as being unnatural. The
same is true of the corresponding cases of remaining. But there would
seem to be a sense in which a state of rest and a motion are opposites.]



BOOK VI

Part 1 

Now if the terms 'continuous', 'in contact', and 'in succession'
are understood as defined above things being 'continuous' if their
extremities are one, 'in contact' if their extremities are together,
and 'in succession' if there is nothing of their own kind intermediate
between them-nothing that is continuous can be composed 'of indivisibles':
e.g. a line cannot be composed of points, the line being continuous
and the point indivisible. For the extremities of two points can neither
be one (since of an indivisible there can be no extremity as distinct
from some other part) nor together (since that which has no parts
can have no extremity, the extremity and the thing of which it is
the extremity being distinct). 

Moreover, if that which is continuous is composed of points, these
points must be either continuous or in contact with one another: and
the same reasoning applies in the case of all indivisibles. Now for
the reason given above they cannot be continuous: and one thing can
be in contact with another only if whole is in contact with whole
or part with part or part with whole. But since indivisibles have
no parts, they must be in contact with one another as whole with whole.
And if they are in contact with one another as whole with whole, they
will not be continuous: for that which is continuous has distinct
parts: and these parts into which it is divisible are different in
this way, i.e. spatially separate. 

Nor, again, can a point be in succession to a point or a moment to
a moment in such a way that length can be composed of points or time
of moments: for things are in succession if there is nothing of their
own kind intermediate between them, whereas that which is intermediate
between points is always a line and that which is intermediate between
moments is always a period of time. 

Again, if length and time could thus be composed of indivisibles,
they could be divided into indivisibles, since each is divisible into
the parts of which it is composed. But, as we saw, no continuous thing
is divisible into things without parts. Nor can there be anything
of any other kind intermediate between the parts or between the moments:
for if there could be any such thing it is clear that it must be either
indivisible or divisible, and if it is divisible, it must be divisible
either into indivisibles or into divisibles that are infinitely divisible,
in which case it is continuous. 

Moreover, it is plain that everything continuous is divisible into
divisibles that are infinitely divisible: for if it were divisible
into indivisibles, we should have an indivisible in contact with an
indivisible, since the extremities of things that are continuous with
one another are one and are in contact. 

The same reasoning applies equally to magnitude, to time, and to motion:
either all of these are composed of indivisibles and are divisible
into indivisibles, or none. This may be made clear as follows. If
a magnitude is composed of indivisibles, the motion over that magnitude
must be composed of corresponding indivisible motions: e.g. if the
magnitude ABG is composed of the indivisibles A, B, G, each corresponding
part of the motion DEZ of O over ABG is indivisible. Therefore, since
where there is motion there must be something that is in motion, and
where there is something in motion there must be motion, therefore
the being-moved will also be composed of indivisibles. So O traversed
A when its motion was D, B when its motion was E, and G similarly
when its motion was Z. Now a thing that is in motion from one place
to another cannot at the moment when it was in motion both be in motion
and at the same time have completed its motion at the place to which
it was in motion: e.g. if a man is walking to Thebes, he cannot be
walking to Thebes and at the same time have completed his walk to
Thebes: and, as we saw, O traverses a the partless section A in virtue
of the presence of the motion D. Consequently, if O actually passed
through A after being in process of passing through, the motion must
be divisible: for at the time when O was passing through, it neither
was at rest nor had completed its passage but was in an intermediate
state: while if it is passing through and has completed its passage
at the same moment, then that which is walking will at the moment
when it is walking have completed its walk and will be in the place
to which it is walking; that is to say, it will have completed its
motion at the place to which it is in motion. And if a thing is in
motion over the whole Kbg and its motion is the three D, E, and Z,
and if it is not in motion at all over the partless section A but
has completed its motion over it, then the motion will consist not
of motions but of starts, and will take place by a thing's having
completed a motion without being in motion: for on this assumption
it has completed its passage through A without passing through it.
So it will be possible for a thing to have completed a walk without
ever walking: for on this assumption it has completed a walk over
a particular distance without walking over that distance. Since, then,
everything must be either at rest or in motion, and O is therefore
at rest in each of the sections A, B, and G, it follows that a thing
can be continuously at rest and at the same time in motion: for, as
we saw, O is in motion over the whole ABG and at rest in any part
(and consequently in the whole) of it. Moreover, if the indivisibles
composing DEZ are motions, it would be possible for a thing in spite
of the presence in it of motion to be not in motion but at rest, while
if they are not motions, it would be possible for motion to be composed
of something other than motions. 

And if length and motion are thus indivisible, it is neither more
nor less necessary that time also be similarly indivisible, that is
to say be composed of indivisible moments: for if the whole distance
is divisible and an equal velocity will cause a thing to pass through
less of it in less time, the time must also be divisible, and conversely,
if the time in which a thing is carried over the section A is divisible,
this section A must also be divisible. 

Part 2

And since every magnitude is divisible into magnitudes-for we have
shown that it is impossible for anything continuous to be composed
of indivisible parts, and every magnitude is continuous-it necessarily
follows that the quicker of two things traverses a greater magnitude
in an equal time, an equal magnitude in less time, and a greater magnitude
in less time, in conformity with the definition sometimes given of
'the quicker'. Suppose that A is quicker than B. Now since of two
things that which changes sooner is quicker, in the time ZH, in which
A has changed from G to D, B will not yet have arrived at D but will
be short of it: so that in an equal time the quicker will pass over
a greater magnitude. More than this, it will pass over a greater magnitude
in less time: for in the time in which A has arrived at D, B being
the slower has arrived, let us say, at E. Then since A has occupied
the whole time ZH in arriving at D, will have arrived at O in less
time than this, say ZK. Now the magnitude GO that A has passed over
is greater than the magnitude GE, and the time ZK is less than the
whole time ZH: so that the quicker will pass over a greater magnitude
in less time. And from this it is also clear that the quicker will
pass over an equal magnitude in less time than the slower. For since
it passes over the greater magnitude in less time than the slower,
and (regarded by itself) passes over LM the greater in more time than
LX the lesser, the time PRh in which it passes over LM will be more
than the time PS, which it passes over LX: so that, the time PRh being
less than the time PCh in which the slower passes over LX, the time
PS will also be less than the time PX: for it is less than the time
PRh, and that which is less than something else that is less than
a thing is also itself less than that thing. Hence it follows that
the quicker will traverse an equal magnitude in less time than the
slower. Again, since the motion of anything must always occupy either
an equal time or less or more time in comparison with that of another
thing, and since, whereas a thing is slower if its motion occupies
more time and of equal velocity if its motion occupies an equal time,
the quicker is neither of equal velocity nor slower, it follows that
the motion of the quicker can occupy neither an equal time nor more
time. It can only be, then, that it occupies less time, and thus we
get the necessary consequence that the quicker will pass over an equal
magnitude (as well as a greater) in less time than the slower.

And since every motion is in time and a motion may occupy any time,
and the motion of everything that is in motion may be either quicker
or slower, both quicker motion and slower motion may occupy any time:
and this being so, it necessarily follows that time also is continuous.
By continuous I mean that which is divisible into divisibles that
are infinitely divisible: and if we take this as the definition of
continuous, it follows necessarily that time is continuous. For since
it has been shown that the quicker will pass over an equal magnitude
in less time than the slower, suppose that A is quicker and B slower,
and that the slower has traversed the magnitude GD in the time ZH.
Now it is clear that the quicker will traverse the same magnitude
in less time than this: let us say in the time ZO. Again, since the
quicker has passed over the whole D in the time ZO, the slower will
in the same time pass over GK, say, which is less than GD. And since
B, the slower, has passed over GK in the time ZO, the quicker will
pass over it in less time: so that the time ZO will again be divided.
And if this is divided the magnitude GK will also be divided just
as GD was: and again, if the magnitude is divided, the time will also
be divided. And we can carry on this process for ever, taking the
slower after the quicker and the quicker after the slower alternately,
and using what has been demonstrated at each stage as a new point
of departure: for the quicker will divide the time and the slower
will divide the length. If, then, this alternation always holds good,
and at every turn involves a division, it is evident that all time
must be continuous. And at the same time it is clear that all magnitude
is also continuous; for the divisions of which time and magnitude
respectively are susceptible are the same and equal. 

Moreover, the current popular arguments make it plain that, if time
is continuous, magnitude is continuous also, inasmuch as a thing asses
over half a given magnitude in half the time taken to cover the whole:
in fact without qualification it passes over a less magnitude in less
time; for the divisions of time and of magnitude will be the same.
And if either is infinite, so is the other, and the one is so in the
same way as the other; i.e. if time is infinite in respect of its
extremities, length is also infinite in respect of its extremities:
if time is infinite in respect of divisibility, length is also infinite
in respect of divisibility: and if time is infinite in both respects,
magnitude is also infinite in both respects. 

Hence Zeno's argument makes a false assumption in asserting that it
is impossible for a thing to pass over or severally to come in contact
with infinite things in a finite time. For there are two senses in
which length and time and generally anything continuous are called
'infinite': they are called so either in respect of divisibility or
in respect of their extremities. So while a thing in a finite time
cannot come in contact with things quantitatively infinite, it can
come in contact with things infinite in respect of divisibility: for
in this sense the time itself is also infinite: and so we find that
the time occupied by the passage over the infinite is not a finite
but an infinite time, and the contact with the infinites is made by
means of moments not finite but infinite in number. 

The passage over the infinite, then, cannot occupy a finite time,
and the passage over the finite cannot occupy an infinite time: if
the time is infinite the magnitude must be infinite also, and if the
magnitude is infinite, so also is the time. This may be shown as follows.
Let AB be a finite magnitude, and let us suppose that it is traversed
in infinite time G, and let a finite period GD of the time be taken.
Now in this period the thing in motion will pass over a certain segment
of the magnitude: let BE be the segment that it has thus passed over.
(This will be either an exact measure of AB or less or greater than
an exact measure: it makes no difference which it is.) Then, since
a magnitude equal to BE will always be passed over in an equal time,
and BE measures the whole magnitude, the whole time occupied in passing
over AB will be finite: for it will be divisible into periods equal
in number to the segments into which the magnitude is divisible. Moreover,
if it is the case that infinite time is not occupied in passing over
every magnitude, but it is possible to ass over some magnitude, say
BE, in a finite time, and if this BE measures the whole of which it
is a part, and if an equal magnitude is passed over in an equal time,
then it follows that the time like the magnitude is finite. That infinite
time will not be occupied in passing over BE is evident if the time
be taken as limited in one direction: for as the part will be passed
over in less time than the whole, the time occupied in traversing
this part must be finite, the limit in one direction being given.
The same reasoning will also show the falsity of the assumption that
infinite length can be traversed in a finite time. It is evident,
then, from what has been said that neither a line nor a surface nor
in fact anything continuous can be indivisible. 

This conclusion follows not only from the present argument but from
the consideration that the opposite assumption implies the divisibility
of the indivisible. For since the distinction of quicker and slower
may apply to motions occupying any period of time and in an equal
time the quicker passes over a greater length, it may happen that
it will pass over a length twice, or one and a half times, as great
as that passed over by the slower: for their respective velocities
may stand to one another in this proportion. Suppose, then, that the
quicker has in the same time been carried over a length one and a
half times as great as that traversed by the slower, and that the
respective magnitudes are divided, that of the quicker, the magnitude
ABGD, into three indivisibles, and that of the slower into the two
indivisibles EZ, ZH. Then the time may also be divided into three
indivisibles, for an equal magnitude will be passed over in an equal
time. Suppose then that it is thus divided into KL, Lm, MN. Again,
since in the same time the slower has been carried over Ez, ZH, the
time may also be similarly divided into two. Thus the indivisible
will be divisible, and that which has no parts will be passed over
not in an indivisible but in a greater time. It is evident, therefore,
that nothing continuous is without parts. 

Part 3

The present also is necessarily indivisible-the present, that is,
not in the sense in which the word is applied to one thing in virtue
of another, but in its proper and primary sense; in which sense it
is inherent in all time. For the present is something that is an extremity
of the past (no part of the future being on this side of it) and also
of the future (no part of the past being on the other side of it):
it is, as we have said, a limit of both. And if it is once shown that
it is essentially of this character and one and the same, it will
at once be evident also that it is indivisible. 

Now the present that is the extremity of both times must be one and
the same: for if each extremity were different, the one could not
be in succession to the other, because nothing continuous can be composed
of things having no parts: and if the one is apart from the other,
there will be time intermediate between them, because everything continuous
is such that there is something intermediate between its limits and
described by the same name as itself. But if the intermediate thing
is time, it will be divisible: for all time has been shown to be divisible.
Thus on this assumption the present is divisible. But if the present
is divisible, there will be part of the past in the future and part
of the future in the past: for past time will be marked off from future
time at the actual point of division. Also the present will be a present
not in the proper sense but in virtue of something else: for the division
which yields it will not be a division proper. Furthermore, there
will be a part of the present that is past and a part that is future,
and it will not always be the same part that is past or future: in
fact one and the same present will not be simultaneous: for the time
may be divided at many points. If, therefore, the present cannot possibly
have these characteristics, it follows that it must be the same present
that belongs to each of the two times. But if this is so it is evident
that the present is also indivisible: for if it is divisible it will
be involved in the same implications as before. It is clear, then,
from what has been said that time contains something indivisible,
and this is what we call a present. 

We will now show that nothing can be in motion in a present. For if
this is possible, there can be both quicker and slower motion in the
present. Suppose then that in the present N the quicker has traversed
the distance AB. That being so, the slower will in the same present
traverse a distance less than AB, say AG. But since the slower will
have occupied the whole present in traversing AG, the quicker will
occupy less than this in traversing it. Thus we shall have a division
of the present, whereas we found it to be indivisible. It is impossible,
therefore, for anything to be in motion in a present. 

Nor can anything be at rest in a present: for, as we were saying,
only can be at rest which is naturally designed to be in motion but
is not in motion when, where, or as it would naturally be so: since,
therefore, nothing is naturally designed to be in motion in a present,
it is clear that nothing can be at rest in a present either.

Moreover, inasmuch as it is the same present that belongs to both
the times, and it is possible for a thing to be in motion throughout
one time and to be at rest throughout the other, and that which is
in motion or at rest for the whole of a time will be in motion or
at rest as the case may be in any part of it in which it is naturally
designed to be in motion or at rest: this being so, the assumption
that there can be motion or rest in a present will carry with it the
implication that the same thing can at the same time be at rest and
in motion: for both the times have the same extremity, viz. the present.

Again, when we say that a thing is at rest, we imply that its condition
in whole and in part is at the time of speaking uniform with what
it was previously: but the present contains no 'previously': consequently,
there can be no rest in it. 

It follows then that the motion of that which is in motion and the
rest of that which is at rest must occupy time. 

Part 4

Further, everything that changes must be divisible. For since every
change is from something to something, and when a thing is at the
goal of its change it is no longer changing, and when both it itself
and all its parts are at the starting-point of its change it is not
changing (for that which is in whole and in part in an unvarying condition
is not in a state of change); it follows, therefore, that part of
that which is changing must be at the starting-point and part at the
goal: for as a whole it cannot be in both or in neither. (Here by
'goal of change' I mean that which comes first in the process of change:
e.g. in a process of change from white the goal in question will be
grey, not black: for it is not necessary that that that which is changing
should be at either of the extremes.) It is evident, therefore, that
everything that changes must be divisible. 

Now motion is divisible in two senses. In the first place it is divisible
in virtue of the time that it occupies. In the second place it is
divisible according to the motions of the several parts of that which
is in motion: e.g. if the whole AG is in motion, there will be a motion
of AB and a motion of BG. That being so, let DE be the motion of the
part AB and EZ the motion of the part BG. Then the whole Dz must be
the motion of AG: for DZ must constitute the motion of AG inasmuch
as DE and EZ severally constitute the motions of each of its parts.
But the motion of a thing can never be constituted by the motion of
something else: consequently the whole motion is the motion of the
whole magnitude. 

Again, since every motion is a motion of something, and the whole
motion DZ is not the motion of either of the parts (for each of the
parts DE, EZ is the motion of one of the parts AB, BG) or of anything
else (for, the whole motion being the motion of a whole, the parts
of the motion are the motions of the parts of that whole: and the
parts of DZ are the motions of AB, BG and of nothing else: for, as
we saw, a motion that is one cannot be the motion of more things than
one): since this is so, the whole motion will be the motion of the
magnitude ABG. 

Again, if there is a motion of the whole other than DZ, say the the
of each of the arts may be subtracted from it: and these motions will
be equal to DE, EZ respectively: for the motion of that which is one
must be one. So if the whole motion OI may be divided into the motions
of the parts, OI will be equal to DZ: if on the other hand there is
any remainder, say KI, this will be a motion of nothing: for it can
be the motion neither of the whole nor of the parts (as the motion
of that which is one must be one) nor of anything else: for a motion
that is continuous must be the motion of things that are continuous.
And the same result follows if the division of OI reveals a surplus
on the side of the motions of the parts. Consequently, if this is
impossible, the whole motion must be the same as and equal to DZ.

This then is what is meant by the division of motion according to
the motions of the parts: and it must be applicable to everything
that is divisible into parts. 

Motion is also susceptible of another kind of division, that according
to time. For since all motion is in time and all time is divisible,
and in less time the motion is less, it follows that every motion
must be divisible according to time. And since everything that is
in motion is in motion in a certain sphere and for a certain time
and has a motion belonging to it, it follows that the time, the motion,
the being-in-motion, the thing that is in motion, and the sphere of
the motion must all be susceptible of the same divisions (though spheres
of motion are not all divisible in a like manner: thus quantity is
essentially, quality accidentally divisible). For suppose that A is
the time occupied by the motion B. Then if all the time has been occupied
by the whole motion, it will take less of the motion to occupy half
the time, less again to occupy a further subdivision of the time,
and so on to infinity. Again, the time will be divisible similarly
to the motion: for if the whole motion occupies all the time half
the motion will occupy half the time, and less of the motion again
will occupy less of the time. 

In the same way the being-in-motion will also be divisible. For let
G be the whole being-in-motion. Then the being-in-motion that corresponds
to half the motion will be less than the whole being-in-motion, that
which corresponds to a quarter of the motion will be less again, and
so on to infinity. Moreover by setting out successively the being-in-motion
corresponding to each of the two motions DG (say) and GE, we may argue
that the whole being-in-motion will correspond to the whole motion
(for if it were some other being-in-motion that corresponded to the
whole motion, there would be more than one being-in motion corresponding
to the same motion), the argument being the same as that whereby we
showed that the motion of a thing is divisible into the motions of
the parts of the thing: for if we take separately the being-in motion
corresponding to each of the two motions, we shall see that the whole
being-in motion is continuous. 

The same reasoning will show the divisibility of the length, and in
fact of everything that forms a sphere of change (though some of these
are only accidentally divisible because that which changes is so):
for the division of one term will involve the division of all. So,
too, in the matter of their being finite or infinite, they will all
alike be either the one or the other. And we now see that in most
cases the fact that all the terms are divisible or infinite is a direct
consequence of the fact that the thing that changes is divisible or
infinite: for the attributes 'divisible' and 'infinite' belong in
the first instance to the thing that changes. That divisibility does
so we have already shown: that infinity does so will be made clear
in what follows? 

Part 5

Since everything that changes changes from something to something,
that which has changed must at the moment when it has first changed
be in that to which it has changed. For that which changes retires
from or leaves that from which it changes: and leaving, if not identical
with changing, is at any rate a consequence of it. And if leaving
is a consequence of changing, having left is a consequence of having
changed: for there is a like relation between the two in each case.

One kind of change, then, being change in a relation of contradiction,
where a thing has changed from not-being to being it has left not-being.
Therefore it will be in being: for everything must either be or not
be. It is evident, then, that in contradictory change that which has
changed must be in that to which it has changed. And if this is true
in this kind of change, it will be true in all other kinds as well:
for in this matter what holds good in the case of one will hold good
likewise in the case of the rest. 

Moreover, if we take each kind of change separately, the truth of
our conclusion will be equally evident, on the ground that that that
which has changed must be somewhere or in something. For, since it
has left that from which it has changed and must be somewhere, it
must be either in that to which it has changed or in something else.
If, then, that which has changed to B is in something other than B,
say G, it must again be changing from G to B: for it cannot be assumed
that there is no interval between G and B, since change is continuous.
Thus we have the result that the thing that has changed, at the moment
when it has changed, is changing to that to which it has changed,
which is impossible: that which has changed, therefore, must be in
that to which it has changed. So it is evident likewise that that
that which has come to be, at the moment when it has come to be, will
be, and that which has ceased to be will not-be: for what we have
said applies universally to every kind of change, and its truth is
most obvious in the case of contradictory change. It is clear, then,
that that which has changed, at the moment when it has first changed,
is in that to which it has changed. 

We will now show that the 'primary when' in which that which has changed
effected the completion of its change must be indivisible, where by
'primary' I mean possessing the characteristics in question of itself
and not in virtue of the possession of them by something else belonging
to it. For let AG be divisible, and let it be divided at B. If then
the completion of change has been effected in AB or again in BG, AG
cannot be the primary thing in which the completion of change has
been effected. If, on the other hand, it has been changing in both
AB and BG (for it must either have changed or be changing in each
of them), it must have been changing in the whole AG: but our assumption
was that AG contains only the completion of the change. It is equally
impossible to suppose that one part of AG contains the process and
the other the completion of the change: for then we shall have something
prior to what is primary. So that in which the completion of change
has been effected must be indivisible. It is also evident, therefore,
that that that in which that which has ceased to be has ceased to
be and that in which that which has come to be has come to be are
indivisible. 

But there are two senses of the expression 'the primary when in which
something has changed'. On the one hand it may mean the primary when
containing the completion of the process of change- the moment when
it is correct to say 'it has changed': on the other hand it may mean
the primary when containing the beginning of the process of change.
Now the primary when that has reference to the end of the change is
something really existent: for a change may really be completed, and
there is such a thing as an end of change, which we have in fact shown
to be indivisible because it is a limit. But that which has reference
to the beginning is not existent at all: for there is no such thing
as a beginning of a process of change, and the time occupied by the
change does not contain any primary when in which the change began.
For suppose that AD is such a primary when. Then it cannot be indivisible:
for, if it were, the moment immediately preceding the change and the
moment in which the change begins would be consecutive (and moments
cannot be consecutive). Again, if the changing thing is at rest in
the whole preceding time GA (for we may suppose that it is at rest),
it is at rest in A also: so if AD is without parts, it will simultaneously
be at rest and have changed: for it is at rest in A and has changed
in D. Since then AD is not without parts, it must be divisible, and
the changing thing must have changed in every part of it (for if it
has changed in neither of the two parts into which AD is divided,
it has not changed in the whole either: if, on the other hand, it
is in process of change in both parts, it is likewise in process of
change in the whole: and if, again, it has changed in one of the two
parts, the whole is not the primary when in which it has changed:
it must therefore have changed in every part). It is evident, then,
that with reference to the beginning of change there is no primary
when in which change has been effected: for the divisions are infinite.

So, too, of that which has changed there is no primary part that has
changed. For suppose that of AE the primary part that has changed
is Az (everything that changes having been shown to be divisible):
and let OI be the time in which DZ has changed. If, then, in the whole
time DZ has changed, in half the time there will be a part that has
changed, less than and therefore prior to DZ: and again there will
be another part prior to this, and yet another, and so on to infinity.
Thus of that which changes there cannot be any primary part that has
changed. It is evident, then, from what has been said, that neither
of that which changes nor of the time in which it changes is there
any primary part. 

With regard, however, to the actual subject of change-that is to say
that in respect of which a thing changes-there is a difference to
be observed. For in a process of change we may distinguish three terms-that
which changes, that in which it changes, and the actual subject of
change, e.g. the man, the time, and the fair complexion. Of these
the man and the time are divisible: but with the fair complexion it
is otherwise (though they are all divisible accidentally, for that
in which the fair complexion or any other quality is an accident is
divisible). For of actual subjects of change it will be seen that
those which are classed as essentially, not accidentally, divisible
have no primary part. Take the case of magnitudes: let AB be a magnitude,
and suppose that it has moved from B to a primary 'where' G. Then
if BG is taken to be indivisible, two things without parts will have
to be contiguous (which is impossible): if on the other hand it is
taken to be divisible, there will be something prior to G to which
the magnitude has changed, and something else again prior to that,
and so on to infinity, because the process of division may be continued
without end. Thus there can be no primary 'where' to which a thing
has changed. And if we take the case of quantitative change, we shall
get a like result, for here too the change is in something continuous.
It is evident, then, that only in qualitative motion can there be
anything essentially indivisible. 

Part 6

Now everything that changes changes time, and that in two senses:
for the time in which a thing is said to change may be the primary
time, or on the other hand it may have an extended reference, as e.g.
when we say that a thing changes in a particular year because it changes
in a particular day. That being so, that which changes must be changing
in any part of the primary time in which it changes. This is clear
from our definition of 'primary', in which the word is said to express
just this: it may also, however, be made evident by the following
argument. Let ChRh be the primary time in which that which is in motion
is in motion: and (as all time is divisible) let it be divided at
K. Now in the time ChK it either is in motion or is not in motion,
and the same is likewise true of the time KRh. Then if it is in motion
in neither of the two parts, it will be at rest in the whole: for
it is impossible that it should be in motion in a time in no part
of which it is in motion. If on the other hand it is in motion in
only one of the two parts of the time, ChRh cannot be the primary
time in which it is in motion: for its motion will have reference
to a time other than ChRh. It must, then, have been in motion in any
part of ChRh. 

And now that this has been proved, it is evident that everything that
is in motion must have been in motion before. For if that which is
in motion has traversed the distance KL in the primary time ChRh,
in half the time a thing that is in motion with equal velocity and
began its motion at the same time will have traversed half the distance.
But if this second thing whose velocity is equal has traversed a certain
distance in a certain time, the original thing that is in motion must
have traversed the same distance in the same time. Hence that which
is in motion must have been in motion before. 

Again, if by taking the extreme moment of the time-for it is the moment
that defines the time, and time is that which is intermediate between
moments-we are enabled to say that motion has taken place in the whole
time ChRh or in fact in any period of it, motion may likewise be said
to have taken place in every other such period. But half the time
finds an extreme in the point of division. Therefore motion will have
taken place in half the time and in fact in any part of it: for as
soon as any division is made there is always a time defined by moments.
If, then, all time is divisible, and that which is intermediate between
moments is time, everything that is changing must have completed an
infinite number of changes. 

Again, since a thing that changes continuously and has not perished
or ceased from its change must either be changing or have changed
in any part of the time of its change, and since it cannot be changing
in a moment, it follows that it must have changed at every moment
in the time: consequently, since the moments are infinite in number,
everything that is changing must have completed an infinite number
of changes. 

And not only must that which is changing have changed, but that which
has changed must also previously have been changing, since everything
that has changed from something to something has changed in a period
of time. For suppose that a thing has changed from A to B in a moment.
Now the moment in which it has changed cannot be the same as that
in which it is at A (since in that case it would be in A and B at
once): for we have shown above that that that which has changed, when
it has changed, is not in that from which it has changed. If, on the
other hand, it is a different moment, there will be a period of time
intermediate between the two: for, as we saw, moments are not consecutive.
Since, then, it has changed in a period of time, and all time is divisible,
in half the time it will have completed another change, in a quarter
another, and so on to infinity: consequently when it has changed,
it must have previously been changing. 

Moreover, the truth of what has been said is more evident in the case
of magnitude, because the magnitude over which what is changing changes
is continuous. For suppose that a thing has changed from G to D. Then
if GD is indivisible, two things without parts will be consecutive.
But since this is impossible, that which is intermediate between them
must be a magnitude and divisible into an infinite number of segments:
consequently, before the change is completed, the thing changes to
those segments. Everything that has changed, therefore, must previously
have been changing: for the same proof also holds good of change with
respect to what is not continuous, changes, that is to say, between
contraries and between contradictories. In such cases we have only
to take the time in which a thing has changed and again apply the
same reasoning. So that which has changed must have been changing
and that which is changing must have changed, and a process of change
is preceded by a completion of change and a completion by a process:
and we can never take any stage and say that it is absolutely the
first. The reason of this is that no two things without parts can
be contiguous, and therefore in change the process of division is
infinite, just as lines may be infinitely divided so that one part
is continually increasing and the other continually decreasing.

So it is evident also that that that which has become must previously
have been in process of becoming, and that which is in process of
becoming must previously have become, everything (that is) that is
divisible and continuous: though it is not always the actual thing
that is in process of becoming of which this is true: sometimes it
is something else, that is to say, some part of the thing in question,
e.g. the foundation-stone of a house. So, too, in the case of that
which is perishing and that which has perished: for that which becomes
and that which perishes must contain an element of infiniteness as
an immediate consequence of the fact that they are continuous things:
and so a thing cannot be in process of becoming without having become
or have become without having been in process of becoming. So, too,
in the case of perishing and having perished: perishing must be preceded
by having perished, and having perished must be preceded by perishing.
It is evident, then, that that which has become must previously have
been in process of becoming, and that which is in process of becoming
must previously have become: for all magnitudes and all periods of
time are infinitely divisible. 

Consequently no absolutely first stage of change can be represented
by any particular part of space or time which the changing thing may
occupy. 

Part 7

Now since the motion of everything that is in motion occupies a period
of time, and a greater magnitude is traversed in a longer time, it
is impossible that a thing should undergo a finite motion in an infinite
time, if this is understood to mean not that the same motion or a
part of it is continually repeated, but that the whole infinite time
is occupied by the whole finite motion. In all cases where a thing
is in motion with uniform velocity it is clear that the finite magnitude
is traversed in a finite time. For if we take a part of the motion
which shall be a measure of the whole, the whole motion is completed
in as many equal periods of the time as there are parts of the motion.
Consequently, since these parts are finite, both in size individually
and in number collectively, the whole time must also be finite: for
it will be a multiple of the portion, equal to the time occupied in
completing the aforesaid part multiplied by the number of the parts.

But it makes no difference even if the velocity is not uniform. For
let us suppose that the line AB represents a finite stretch over which
a thing has been moved in the given time, and let GD be the infinite
time. Now if one part of the stretch must have been traversed before
another part (this is clear, that in the earlier and in the later
part of the time a different part of the stretch has been traversed:
for as the time lengthens a different part of the motion will always
be completed in it, whether the thing in motion changes with uniform
velocity or not: and whether the rate of motion increases or diminishes
or remains stationary this is none the less so), let us then take
AE a part of the whole stretch of motion AB which shall be a measure
of AB. Now this part of the motion occupies a certain period of the
infinite time: it cannot itself occupy an infinite time, for we are
assuming that that is occupied by the whole AB. And if again I take
another part equal to AE, that also must occupy a finite time in consequence
of the same assumption. And if I go on taking parts in this way, on
the one hand there is no part which will be a measure of the infinite
time (for the infinite cannot be composed of finite parts whether
equal or unequal, because there must be some unity which will be a
measure of things finite in multitude or in magnitude, which, whether
they are equal or unequal, are none the less limited in magnitude);
while on the other hand the finite stretch of motion AB is a certain
multiple of AE: consequently the motion AB must be accomplished in
a finite time. Moreover it is the same with coming to rest as with
motion. And so it is impossible for one and the same thing to be infinitely
in process of becoming or of perishing. The reasoning he will prove
that in a finite time there cannot be an infinite extent of motion
or of coming to rest, whether the motion is regular or irregular.
For if we take a part which shall be a measure of the whole time,
in this part a certain fraction, not the whole, of the magnitude will
be traversed, because we assume that the traversing of the whole occupies
all the time. Again, in another equal part of the time another part
of the magnitude will be traversed: and similarly in each part of
the time that we take, whether equal or unequal to the part originally
taken. It makes no difference whether the parts are equal or not,
if only each is finite: for it is clear that while the time is exhausted
by the subtraction of its parts, the infinite magnitude will not be
thus exhausted, since the process of subtraction is finite both in
respect of the quantity subtracted and of the number of times a subtraction
is made. Consequently the infinite magnitude will not be traversed
in finite time: and it makes no difference whether the magnitude is
infinite in only one direction or in both: for the same reasoning
will hold good. 

This having been proved, it is evident that neither can a finite magnitude
traverse an infinite magnitude in a finite time, the reason being
the same as that given above: in part of the time it will traverse
a finite magnitude and in each several part likewise, so that in the
whole time it will traverse a finite magnitude. 

And since a finite magnitude will not traverse an infinite in a finite
time, it is clear that neither will an infinite traverse a finite
in a finite time. For if the infinite could traverse the finite, the
finite could traverse the infinite; for it makes no difference which
of the two is the thing in motion; either case involves the traversing
of the infinite by the finite. For when the infinite magnitude A is
in motion a part of it, say GD, will occupy the finite and then another,
and then another, and so on to infinity. Thus the two results will
coincide: the infinite will have completed a motion over the finite
and the finite will have traversed the infinite: for it would seem
to be impossible for the motion of the infinite over the finite to
occur in any way other than by the finite traversing the infinite
either by locomotion over it or by measuring it. Therefore, since
this is impossible, the infinite cannot traverse the finite.

Nor again will the infinite traverse the infinite in a finite time.
Otherwise it would also traverse the finite, for the infinite includes
the finite. We can further prove this in the same way by taking the
time as our starting-point. 

Since, then, it is established that in a finite time neither will
the finite traverse the infinite, nor the infinite the finite, nor
the infinite the infinite, it is evident also that in a finite time
there cannot be infinite motion: for what difference does it make
whether we take the motion or the magnitude to be infinite? If either
of the two is infinite, the other must be so likewise: for all locomotion
is in space. 

Part 8

Since everything to which motion or rest is natural is in motion or
at rest in the natural time, place, and manner, that which is coming
to a stand, when it is coming to a stand, must be in motion: for if
it is not in motion it must be at rest: but that which is at rest
cannot be coming to rest. From this it evidently follows that coming
to a stand must occupy a period of time: for the motion of that which
is in motion occupies a period of time, and that which is coming to
a stand has been shown to be in motion: consequently coming to a stand
must occupy a period of time. 

Again, since the terms 'quicker' and 'slower' are used only of that
which occupies a period of time, and the process of coming to a stand
may be quicker or slower, the same conclusion follows. 

And that which is coming to a stand must be coming to a stand in any
part of the primary time in which it is coming to a stand. For if
it is coming to a stand in neither of two parts into which the time
may be divided, it cannot be coming to a stand in the whole time,
with the result that that that which is coming to a stand will not
be coming to a stand. If on the other hand it is coming to a stand
in only one of the two parts of the time, the whole cannot be the
primary time in which it is coming to a stand: for it is coming to
a stand in the whole time not primarily but in virtue of something
distinct from itself, the argument being the same as that which we
used above about things in motion. 

And just as there is no primary time in which that which is in motion
is in motion, so too there is no primary time in which that which
is coming to a stand is coming to a stand, there being no primary
stage either of being in motion or of coming to a stand. For let AB
be the primary time in which a thing is coming to a stand. Now AB
cannot be without parts: for there cannot be motion in that which
is without parts, because the moving thing would necessarily have
been already moved for part of the time of its movement: and that
which is coming to a stand has been shown to be in motion. But since
Ab is therefore divisible, the thing is coming to a stand in every
one of the parts of AB: for we have shown above that it is coming
to a stand in every one of the parts in which it is primarily coming
to a stand. Since then, that in which primarily a thing is coming
to a stand must be a period of time and not something indivisible,
and since all time is infinitely divisible, there cannot be anything
in which primarily it is coming to a stand. 

Nor again can there be a primary time at which the being at rest of
that which is at rest occurred: for it cannot have occurred in that
which has no parts, because there cannot be motion in that which is
indivisible, and that in which rest takes place is the same as that
in which motion takes place: for we defined a state of rest to be
the state of a thing to which motion is natural but which is not in
motion when (that is to say in that in which) motion would be natural
to it. Again, our use of the phrase 'being at rest' also implies that
the previous state of a thing is still unaltered, not one point only
but two at least being thus needed to determine its presence: consequently
that in which a thing is at rest cannot be without parts. Since, then
it is divisible, it must be a period of time, and the thing must be
at rest in every one of its parts, as may be shown by the same method
as that used above in similar demonstrations. 

So there can be no primary part of the time: and the reason is that
rest and motion are always in a period of time, and a period of time
has no primary part any more than a magnitude or in fact anything
continuous: for everything continuous is divisible into an infinite
number of parts. 

And since everything that is in motion is in motion in a period of
time and changes from something to something, when its motion is comprised
within a particular period of time essentially-that is to say when
it fills the whole and not merely a part of the time in question-it
is impossible that in that time that which is in motion should be
over against some particular thing primarily. For if a thing-itself
and each of its parts-occupies the same space for a definite period
of time, it is at rest: for it is in just these circumstances that
we use the term 'being at rest'-when at one moment after another it
can be said with truth that a thing, itself and its parts, occupies
the same space. So if this is being at rest it is impossible for that
which is changing to be as a whole, at the time when it is primarily
changing, over against any particular thing (for the whole period
of time is divisible), so that in one part of it after another it
will be true to say that the thing, itself and its parts, occupies
the same space. If this is not so and the aforesaid proposition is
true only at a single moment, then the thing will be over against
a particular thing not for any period of time but only at a moment
that limits the time. It is true that at any moment it is always over
against something stationary: but it is not at rest: for at a moment
it is not possible for anything to be either in motion or at rest.
So while it is true to say that that which is in motion is at a moment
not in motion and is opposite some particular thing, it cannot in
a period of time be over against that which is at rest: for that would
involve the conclusion that that which is in locomotion is at rest.

Part 9

Zeno's reasoning, however, is fallacious, when he says that if everything
when it occupies an equal space is at rest, and if that which is in
locomotion is always occupying such a space at any moment, the flying
arrow is therefore motionless. This is false, for time is not composed
of indivisible moments any more than any other magnitude is composed
of indivisibles. 

Zeno's arguments about motion, which cause so much disquietude to
those who try to solve the problems that they present, are four in
number. The first asserts the non-existence of motion on the ground
that that which is in locomotion must arrive at the half-way stage
before it arrives at the goal. This we have discussed above.

The second is the so-called 'Achilles', and it amounts to this, that
in a race the quickest runner can never overtake the slowest, since
the pursuer must first reach the point whence the pursued started,
so that the slower must always hold a lead. This argument is the same
in principle as that which depends on bisection, though it differs
from it in that the spaces with which we successively have to deal
are not divided into halves. The result of the argument is that the
slower is not overtaken: but it proceeds along the same lines as the
bisection-argument (for in both a division of the space in a certain
way leads to the result that the goal is not reached, though the 'Achilles'
goes further in that it affirms that even the quickest runner in legendary
tradition must fail in his pursuit of the slowest), so that the solution
must be the same. And the axiom that that which holds a lead is never
overtaken is false: it is not overtaken, it is true, while it holds
a lead: but it is overtaken nevertheless if it is granted that it
traverses the finite distance prescribed. These then are two of his
arguments. 

The third is that already given above, to the effect that the flying
arrow is at rest, which result follows from the assumption that time
is composed of moments: if this assumption is not granted, the conclusion
will not follow. 

The fourth argument is that concerning the two rows of bodies, each
row being composed of an equal number of bodies of equal size, passing
each other on a race-course as they proceed with equal velocity in
opposite directions, the one row originally occupying the space between
the goal and the middle point of the course and the other that between
the middle point and the starting-post. This, he thinks, involves
the conclusion that half a given time is equal to double that time.
The fallacy of the reasoning lies in the assumption that a body occupies
an equal time in passing with equal velocity a body that is in motion
and a body of equal size that is at rest; which is false. For instance
(so runs the argument), let A, A...be the stationary bodies of equal
size, B, B...the bodies, equal in number and in size to A, A...,originally
occupying the half of the course from the starting-post to the middle
of the A's, and G, G...those originally occupying the other half from
the goal to the middle of the A's, equal in number, size, and velocity
to B, B....Then three consequences follow: 

First, as the B's and the G's pass one another, the first B reaches
the last G at the same moment as the first G reaches the last B. Secondly
at this moment the first G has passed all the A's, whereas the first
B has passed only half the A's, and has consequently occupied only
half the time occupied by the first G, since each of the two occupies
an equal time in passing each A. Thirdly, at the same moment all the
B's have passed all the G's: for the first G and the first B will
simultaneously reach the opposite ends of the course, since (so says
Zeno) the time occupied by the first G in passing each of the B's
is equal to that occupied by it in passing each of the A's, because
an equal time is occupied by both the first B and the first G in passing
all the A's. This is the argument, but it presupposed the aforesaid
fallacious assumption. 

Nor in reference to contradictory change shall we find anything unanswerable
in the argument that if a thing is changing from not-white, say, to
white, and is in neither condition, then it will be neither white
nor not-white: for the fact that it is not wholly in either condition
will not preclude us from calling it white or not-white. We call a
thing white or not-white not necessarily because it is be one or the
other, but cause most of its parts or the most essential parts of
it are so: not being in a certain condition is different from not
being wholly in that condition. So, too, in the case of being and
not-being and all other conditions which stand in a contradictory
relation: while the changing thing must of necessity be in one of
the two opposites, it is never wholly in either. 

Again, in the case of circles and spheres and everything whose motion
is confined within the space that it occupies, it is not true to say
the motion can be nothing but rest, on the ground that such things
in motion, themselves and their parts, will occupy the same position
for a period of time, and that therefore they will be at once at rest
and in motion. For in the first place the parts do not occupy the
same position for any period of time: and in the second place the
whole also is always changing to a different position: for if we take
the orbit as described from a point A on a circumference, it will
not be the same as the orbit as described from B or G or any other
point on the same circumference except in an accidental sense, the
sense that is to say in which a musical man is the same as a man.
Thus one orbit is always changing into another, and the thing will
never be at rest. And it is the same with the sphere and everything
else whose motion is confined within the space that it occupies.

Part 10

Our next point is that that which is without parts cannot be in motion
except accidentally: i.e. it can be in motion only in so far as the
body or the magnitude is in motion and the partless is in motion by
inclusion therein, just as that which is in a boat may be in motion
in consequence of the locomotion of the boat, or a part may be in
motion in virtue of the motion of the whole. (It must be remembered,
however, that by 'that which is without parts' I mean that which is
quantitatively indivisible (and that the case of the motion of a part
is not exactly parallel): for parts have motions belonging essentially
and severally to themselves distinct from the motion of the whole.
The distinction may be seen most clearly in the case of a revolving
sphere, in which the velocities of the parts near the centre and of
those on the surface are different from one another and from that
of the whole; this implies that there is not one motion but many).
As we have said, then, that which is without parts can be in motion
in the sense in which a man sitting in a boat is in motion when the
boat is travelling, but it cannot be in motion of itself. For suppose
that it is changing from AB to BG-either from one magnitude to another,
or from one form to another, or from some state to its contradictory-and
let D be the primary time in which it undergoes the change. Then in
the time in which it is changing it must be either in AB or in BG
or partly in one and partly in the other: for this, as we saw, is
true of everything that is changing. Now it cannot be partly in each
of the two: for then it would be divisible into parts. Nor again can
it be in BG: for then it will have completed the change, whereas the
assumption is that the change is in process. It remains, then, that
in the time in which it is changing, it is in Ab. That being so, it
will be at rest: for, as we saw, to be in the same condition for a
period of time is to be at rest. So it is not possible for that which
has no parts to be in motion or to change in any way: for only one
condition could have made it possible for it to have motion, viz.
that time should be composed of moments, in which case at any moment
it would have completed a motion or a change, so that it would never
be in motion, but would always have been in motion. But this we have
already shown above to be impossible: time is not composed of moments,
just as a line is not composed of points, and motion is not composed
of starts: for this theory simply makes motion consist of indivisibles
in exactly the same way as time is made to consist of moments or a
length of points. 

Again, it may be shown in the following way that there can be no motion
of a point or of any other indivisible. That which is in motion can
never traverse a space greater than itself without first traversing
a space equal to or less than itself. That being so, it is evident
that the point also must first traverse a space equal to or less than
itself. But since it is indivisible, there can be no space less than
itself for it to traverse first: so it will have to traverse a distance
equal to itself. Thus the line will be composed of points, for the
point, as it continually traverses a distance equal to itself, will
be a measure of the whole line. But since this is impossible, it is
likewise impossible for the indivisible to be in motion.

Again, since motion is always in a period of time and never in a moment,
and all time is divisible, for everything that is in motion there
must be a time less than that in which it traverses a distance as
great as itself. For that in which it is in motion will be a time,
because all motion is in a period of time; and all time has been shown
above to be divisible. Therefore, if a point is in motion, there must
be a time less than that in which it has itself traversed any distance.
But this is impossible, for in less time it must traverse less distance,
and thus the indivisible will be divisible into something less than
itself, just as the time is so divisible: the fact being that the
only condition under which that which is without parts and indivisible
could be in motion would have been the possibility of the infinitely
small being in motion in a moment: for in the two questions-that of
motion in a moment and that of motion of something indivisible-the
same principle is involved. 

Our next point is that no process of change is infinite: for every
change, whether between contradictories or between contraries, is
a change from something to something. Thus in contradictory changes
the positive or the negative, as the case may be, is the limit, e.g.
being is the limit of coming to be and not-being is the limit of ceasing
to be: and in contrary changes the particular contraries are the limits,
since these are the extreme points of any such process of change,
and consequently of every process of alteration: for alteration is
always dependent upon some contraries. Similarly contraries are the
extreme points of processes of increase and decrease: the limit of
increase is to be found in the complete magnitude proper to the peculiar
nature of the thing that is increasing, while the limit of decrease
is the complete loss of such magnitude. Locomotion, it is true, we
cannot show to be finite in this way, since it is not always between
contraries. But since that which cannot be cut (in the sense that
it is inconceivable that it should be cut, the term 'cannot' being
used in several senses)-since it is inconceivable that that which
in this sense cannot be cut should be in process of being cut, and
generally that that which cannot come to be should be in process of
coming to be, it follows that it is inconceivable that that which
cannot complete a change should be in process of changing to that
to which it cannot complete a change. If, then, it is to be assumed
that that which is in locomotion is in process of changing, it must
be capable of completing the change. Consequently its motion is not
infinite, and it will not be in locomotion over an infinite distance,
for it cannot traverse such a distance. 

It is evident, then, that a process of change cannot be infinite in
the sense that it is not defined by limits. But it remains to be considered
whether it is possible in the sense that one and the same process
of change may be infinite in respect of the time which it occupies.
If it is not one process, it would seem that there is nothing to prevent
its being infinite in this sense; e.g. if a process of locomotion
be succeeded by a process of alteration and that by a process of increase
and that again by a process of coming to be: in this way there may
be motion for ever so far as the time is concerned, but it will not
be one motion, because all these motions do not compose one. If it
is to be one process, no motion can be infinite in respect of the
time that it occupies, with the single exception of rotatory locomotion.



BOOK VII

Part 1 

Everything that is in motion must be moved by something. For if it
has not the source of its motion in itself it is evident that it is
moved by something other than itself, for there must be something
else that moves it. If on the other hand it has the source of its
motion in itself, let AB be taken to represent that which is in motion
essentially of itself and not in virtue of the fact that something
belonging to it is in motion. Now in the first place to assume that
Ab, because it is in motion as a whole and is not moved by anything
external to itself, is therefore moved by itself-this is just as if,
supposing that KL is moving LM and is also itself in motion, we were
to deny that KM is moved by anything on the ground that it is not
evident which is the part that is moving it and which the part that
is moved. In the second place that which is in motion without being
moved by anything does not necessarily cease from its motion because
something else is at rest, but a thing must be moved by something
if the fact of something else having ceased from its motion causes
it to be at rest. Thus, if this is accepted, everything that is in
motion must be moved by something. For AB, which has been taken to
represent that which is in motion, must be divisible since everything
that is in motion is divisible. Let it be divided, then, at G. Now
if GB is not in motion, then AB will not be in motion: for if it is,
it is clear that AG would be in motion while BG is at rest, and thus
AB cannot be in motion essentially and primarily. But ex hypothesi
AB is in motion essentially and primarily. Therefore if GB is not
in motion AB will be at rest. But we have agreed that that which is
at rest if something else is not in motion must be moved by something.
Consequently, everything that is in motion must be moved by something:
for that which is in motion will always be divisible, and if a part
of it is not in motion the whole must be at rest. 

Since everything that is in motion must be moved by something, let
us take the case in which a thing is in locomotion and is moved by
something that is itself in motion, and that again is moved by something
else that is in motion, and that by something else, and so on continually:
then the series cannot go on to infinity, but there must be some first
movent. For let us suppose that this is not so and take the series
to be infinite. Let A then be moved by B, B by G, G by D, and so on,
each member of the series being moved by that which comes next to
it. Then since ex hypothesi the movent while causing motion is also
itself in motion, and the motion of the moved and the motion of the
movent must proceed simultaneously (for the movent is causing motion
and the moved is being moved simultaneously) it is evident that the
respective motions of A, B, G, and each of the other moved movents
are simultaneous. Let us take the motion of each separately and let
E be the motion of A, Z of B, and H and O respectively the motions
of G and D: for though they are all moved severally one by another,
yet we may still take the motion of each as numerically one, since
every motion is from something to something and is not infinite in
respect of its extreme points. By a motion that is numerically one
I mean a motion that proceeds from something numerically one and the
same to something numerically one and the same in a period of time
numerically one and the same: for a motion may be the same generically,
specifically, or numerically: it is generically the same if it belongs
to the same category, e.g. substance or quality: it is specifically
the same if it proceeds from something specifically the same to something
specifically the same, e.g. from white to black or from good to bad,
which is not of a kind specifically distinct: it is numerically the
same if it proceeds from something numerically one to something numerically
one in the same period of time, e.g. from a particular white to a
particular black, or from a particular place to a particular place,
in a particular period of time: for if the period of time were not
one and the same, the motion would no longer be numerically one though
it would still be specifically one. 

We have dealt with this question above. Now let us further take the
time in which A has completed its motion, and let it be represented
by K. Then since the motion of A is finite the time will also be finite.
But since the movents and the things moved are infinite, the motion
EZHO, i.e. the motion that is composed of all the individual motions,
must be infinite. For the motions of A, B, and the others may be equal,
or the motions of the others may be greater: but assuming what is
conceivable, we find that whether they are equal or some are greater,
in both cases the whole motion is infinite. And since the motion of
A and that of each of the others are simultaneous, the whole motion
must occupy the same time as the motion of A: but the time occupied
by the motion of A is finite: consequently the motion will be infinite
in a finite time, which is impossible. 

It might be thought that what we set out to prove has thus been shown,
but our argument so far does not prove it, because it does not yet
prove that anything impossible results from the contrary supposition:
for in a finite time there may be an infinite motion, though not of
one thing, but of many: and in the case that we are considering this
is so: for each thing accomplishes its own motion, and there is no
impossibility in many things being in motion simultaneously. But if
(as we see to be universally the case) that which primarily is moved
locally and corporeally must be either in contact with or continuous
with that which moves it, the things moved and the movents must be
continuous or in contact with one another, so that together they all
form a single unity: whether this unity is finite or infinite makes
no difference to our present argument; for in any case since the things
in motion are infinite in number the whole motion will be infinite,
if, as is theoretically possible, each motion is either equal to or
greater than that which follows it in the series: for we shall take
as actual that which is theoretically possible. If, then, A, B, G,
D form an infinite magnitude that passes through the motion EZHO in
the finite time K, this involves the conclusion that an infinite motion
is passed through in a finite time: and whether the magnitude in question
is finite or infinite this is in either case impossible. Therefore
the series must come to an end, and there must be a first movent and
a first moved: for the fact that this impossibility results only from
the assumption of a particular case is immaterial, since the case
assumed is theoretically possible, and the assumption of a theoretically
possible case ought not to give rise to any impossible result.

Part 2

That which is the first movement of a thing-in the sense that it supplies
not 'that for the sake of which' but the source of the motion-is always
together with that which is moved by it by 'together' I mean that
there is nothing intermediate between them). This is universally true
wherever one thing is moved by another. And since there are three
kinds of motion, local, qualitative, and quantitative, there must
also be three kinds of movent, that which causes locomotion, that
which causes alteration, and that which causes increase or decrease.

Let us begin with locomotion, for this is the primary motion. Everything
that is in locomotion is moved either by itself or by something else.
In the case of things that are moved by themselves it is evident that
the moved and the movent are together: for they contain within themselves
their first movent, so that there is nothing in between. The motion
of things that are moved by something else must proceed in one of
four ways: for there are four kinds of locomotion caused by something
other than that which is in motion, viz. pulling, pushing, carrying,
and twirling. All forms of locomotion are reducible to these. Thus
pushing on is a form of pushing in which that which is causing motion
away from itself follows up that which it pushes and continues to
push it: pushing off occurs when the movent does not follow up the
thing that it has moved: throwing when the movent causes a motion
away from itself more violent than the natural locomotion of the thing
moved, which continues its course so long as it is controlled by the
motion imparted to it. Again, pushing apart and pushing together are
forms respectively of pushing off and pulling: pushing apart is pushing
off, which may be a motion either away from the pusher or away from
something else, while pushing together is pulling, which may be a
motion towards something else as well as the puller. We may similarly
classify all the varieties of these last two, e.g. packing and combing:
the former is a form of pushing together, the latter a form of pushing
apart. The same is true of the other processes of combination and
separation (they will all be found to be forms of pushing apart or
of pushing together), except such as are involved in the processes
of becoming and perishing. (At same time it is evident that there
is no other kind of motion but combination and separation: for they
may all be apportioned to one or other of those already mentioned.)
Again, inhaling is a form of pulling, exhaling a form of pushing:
and the same is true of spitting and of all other motions that proceed
through the body, whether secretive or assimilative, the assimilative
being forms of pulling, the secretive of pushing off. All other kinds
of locomotion must be similarly reduced, for they all fall under one
or other of our four heads. And again, of these four, carrying and
twirling are to pulling and pushing. For carrying always follows one
of the other three methods, for that which is carried is in motion
accidentally, because it is in or upon something that is in motion,
and that which carries it is in doing so being either pulled or pushed
or twirled; thus carrying belongs to all the other three kinds of
motion in common. And twirling is a compound of pulling and pushing,
for that which is twirling a thing must be pulling one part of the
thing and pushing another part, since it impels one part away from
itself and another part towards itself. If, therefore, it can be shown
that that which is pushing and that which is pushing and pulling are
adjacent respectively to that which is being pushed and that which
is being pulled, it will be evident that in all locomotion there is
nothing intermediate between moved and movent. But the former fact
is clear even from the definitions of pushing and pulling, for pushing
is motion to something else from oneself or from something else, and
pulling is motion from something else to oneself or to something else,
when the motion of that which is pulling is quicker than the motion
that would separate from one another the two things that are continuous:
for it is this that causes one thing to be pulled on along with the
other. (It might indeed be thought that there is a form of pulling
that arises in another way: that wood, e.g. pulls fire in a manner
different from that described above. But it makes no difference whether
that which pulls is in motion or is stationary when it is pulling:
in the latter case it pulls to the place where it is, while in the
former it pulls to the place where it was.) Now it is impossible to
move anything either from oneself to something else or something else
to oneself without being in contact with it: it is evident, therefore,
that in all locomotion there is nothing intermediate between moved
and movent. 

Nor again is there anything intermediate between that which undergoes
and that which causes alteration: this can be proved by induction:
for in every case we find that the respective extremities of that
which causes and that which undergoes alteration are adjacent. For
our assumption is that things that are undergoing alteration are altered
in virtue of their being affected in respect of their so-called affective
qualities, since that which is of a certain quality is altered in
so far as it is sensible, and the characteristics in which bodies
differ from one another are sensible characteristics: for every body
differs from another in possessing a greater or lesser number of sensible
characteristics or in possessing the same sensible characteristics
in a greater or lesser degree. But the alteration of that which undergoes
alteration is also caused by the above-mentioned characteristics,
which are affections of some particular underlying quality. Thus we
say that a thing is altered by becoming hot or sweet or thick or dry
or white: and we make these assertions alike of what is inanimate
and of what is animate, and further, where animate things are in question,
we make them both of the parts that have no power of sense-perception
and of the senses themselves. For in a way even the senses undergo
alteration, since the active sense is a motion through the body in
the course of which the sense is affected in a certain way. We see,
then, that the animate is capable of every kind of alteration of which
the inanimate is capable: but the inanimate is not capable of every
kind of alteration of which the animate is capable, since it is not
capable of alteration in respect of the senses: moreover the inanimate
is unconscious of being affected by alteration, whereas the animate
is conscious of it, though there is nothing to prevent the animate
also being unconscious of it when the process of the alteration does
not concern the senses. Since, then, the alteration of that which
undergoes alteration is caused by sensible things, in every case of
such alteration it is evident that the respective extremities of that
which causes and that which undergoes alteration are adjacent. Thus
the air is continuous with that which causes the alteration, and the
body that undergoes alteration is continuous with the air. Again,
the colour is continuous with the light and the light with the sight.
And the same is true of hearing and smelling: for the primary movent
in respect to the moved is the air. Similarly, in the case of tasting,
the flavour is adjacent to the sense of taste. And it is just the
same in the case of things that are inanimate and incapable of sense-perception.
Thus there can be nothing intermediate between that which undergoes
and that which causes alteration. 

Nor, again, can there be anything intermediate between that which
suffers and that which causes increase: for the part of the latter
that starts the increase does so by becoming attached in such a way
to the former that the whole becomes one. Again, the decrease of that
which suffers decrease is caused by a part of the thing becoming detached.
So that which causes increase and that which causes decrease must
be continuous with that which suffers increase and that which suffers
decrease respectively: and if two things are continuous with one another
there can be nothing intermediate between them. 

It is evident, therefore, that between the extremities of the moved
and the movent that are respectively first and last in reference to
the moved there is nothing intermediate. 

Part 3

Everything, we say, that undergoes alteration is altered by sensible
causes, and there is alteration only in things that are said to be
essentially affected by sensible things. The truth of this is to be
seen from the following considerations. Of all other things it would
be most natural to suppose that there is alteration in figures and
shapes, and in acquired states and in the processes of acquiring and
losing these: but as a matter of fact in neither of these two classes
of things is there alteration. 

In the first place, when a particular formation of a thing is completed,
we do not call it by the name of its material: e.g. we do not call
the statue 'bronze' or the pyramid 'wax' or the bed 'wood', but we
use a derived expression and call them 'of bronze', 'waxen', and 'wooden'
respectively. But when a thing has been affected and altered in any
way we still call it by the original name: thus we speak of the bronze
or the wax being dry or fluid or hard or hot. 

And not only so: we also speak of the particular fluid or hot substance
as being bronze, giving the material the same name as that which we
use to describe the affection. 

Since, therefore, having regard to the figure or shape of a thing
we no longer call that which has become of a certain figure by the
name of the material that exhibits the figure, whereas having regard
to a thing's affections or alterations we still call it by the name
of its material, it is evident that becomings of the former kind cannot
be alterations. 

Moreover it would seem absurd even to speak in this way, to speak,
that is to say, of a man or house or anything else that has come into
existence as having been altered. Though it may be true that every
such becoming is necessarily the result of something's being altered,
the result, e.g. of the material's being condensed or rarefied or
heated or cooled, nevertheless it is not the things that are coming
into existence that are altered, and their becoming is not an alteration.

Again, acquired states, whether of the body or of the soul, are not
alterations. For some are excellences and others are defects, and
neither excellence nor defect is an alteration: excellence is a perfection
(for when anything acquires its proper excellence we call it perfect,
since it is then if ever that we have a thing in its natural state:
e.g. we have a perfect circle when we have one as good as possible),
while defect is a perishing of or departure from this condition. So
as when speaking of a house we do not call its arrival at perfection
an alteration (for it would be absurd to suppose that the coping or
the tiling is an alteration or that in receiving its coping or its
tiling a house is altered and not perfected), the same also holds
good in the case of excellences and defects and of the persons or
things that possess or acquire them: for excellences are perfections
of a thing's nature and defects are departures from it: consequently
they are not alterations. 

Further, we say that all excellences depend upon particular relations.
Thus bodily excellences such as health and a good state of body we
regard as consisting in a blending of hot and cold elements within
the body in due proportion, in relation either to one another or to
the surrounding atmosphere: and in like manner we regard beauty, strength,
and all the other bodily excellences and defects. Each of them exists
in virtue of a particular relation and puts that which possesses it
in a good or bad condition with regard to its proper affections, where
by 'proper' affections I mean those influences that from the natural
constitution of a thing tend to promote or destroy its existence.
Since then, relatives are neither themselves alterations nor the subjects
of alteration or of becoming or in fact of any change whatever, it
is evident that neither states nor the processes of losing and acquiring
states are alterations, though it may be true that their becoming
or perishing is necessarily, like the becoming or perishing of a specific
character or form, the result of the alteration of certain other things,
e.g. hot and cold or dry and wet elements or the elements, whatever
they may be, on which the states primarily depend. For each several
bodily defect or excellence involves a relation with those things
from which the possessor of the defect or excellence is naturally
subject to alteration: thus excellence disposes its possessor to be
unaffected by these influences or to be affected by those of them
that ought to be admitted, while defect disposes its possessor to
be affected by them or to be unaffected by those of them that ought
to be admitted. 

And the case is similar in regard to the states of the soul, all of
which (like those of body) exist in virtue of particular relations,
the excellences being perfections of nature and the defects departures
from it: moreover, excellence puts its possessor in good condition,
while defect puts its possessor in a bad condition, to meet his proper
affections. Consequently these cannot any more than the bodily states
be alterations, nor can the processes of losing and acquiring them
be so, though their becoming is necessarily the result of an alteration
of the sensitive part of the soul, and this is altered by sensible
objects: for all moral excellence is concerned with bodily pleasures
and pains, which again depend either upon acting or upon remembering
or upon anticipating. Now those that depend upon action are determined
by sense-perception, i.e. they are stimulated by something sensible:
and those that depend upon memory or anticipation are likewise to
be traced to sense-perception, for in these cases pleasure is felt
either in remembering what one has experienced or in anticipating
what one is going to experience. Thus all pleasure of this kind must
be produced by sensible things: and since the presence in any one
of moral defect or excellence involves the presence in him of pleasure
or pain (with which moral excellence and defect are always concerned),
and these pleasures and pains are alterations of the sensitive part,
it is evident that the loss and acquisition of these states no less
than the loss and acquisition of the states of the body must be the
result of the alteration of something else. Consequently, though their
becoming is accompanied by an alteration, they are not themselves
alterations. 

Again, the states of the intellectual part of the soul are not alterations,
nor is there any becoming of them. In the first place it is much more
true of the possession of knowledge that it depends upon a particular
relation. And further, it is evident that there is no becoming of
these states. For that which is potentially possessed of knowledge
becomes actually possessed of it not by being set in motion at all
itself but by reason of the presence of something else: i.e. it is
when it meets with the particular object that it knows in a manner
the particular through its knowledge of the universal. (Again, there
is no becoming of the actual use and activity of these states, unless
it is thought that there is a becoming of vision and touching and
that the activity in question is similar to these.) And the original
acquisition of knowledge is not a becoming or an alteration: for the
terms 'knowing' and 'understanding' imply that the intellect has reached
a state of rest and come to a standstill, and there is no becoming
that leads to a state of rest, since, as we have said above, change
at all can have a becoming. Moreover, just as to say, when any one
has passed from a state of intoxication or sleep or disease to the
contrary state, that he has become possessed of knowledge again is
incorrect in spite of the fact that he was previously incapable of
using his knowledge, so, too, when any one originally acquires the
state, it is incorrect to say that he becomes possessed of knowledge:
for the possession of understanding and knowledge is produced by the
soul's settling down out of the restlessness natural to it. Hence,
too, in learning and in forming judgements on matters relating to
their sense-perceptions children are inferior to adults owing to the
great amount of restlessness and motion in their souls. Nature itself
causes the soul to settle down and come to a state of rest for the
performance of some of its functions, while for the performance of
others other things do so: but in either case the result is brought
about through the alteration of something in the body, as we see in
the case of the use and activity of the intellect arising from a man's
becoming sober or being awakened. It is evident, then, from the preceding
argument that alteration and being altered occur in sensible things
and in the sensitive part of the soul, and, except accidentally, in
nothing else. 

Part 4

A difficulty may be raised as to whether every motion is commensurable
with every other or not. Now if they are all commensurable and if
two things to have the same velocity must accomplish an equal motion
in an equal time, then we may have a circumference equal to a straight
line, or, of course, the one may be greater or less than the other.
Further, if one thing alters and another accomplishes a locomotion
in an equal time, we may have an alteration and a locomotion equal
to one another: thus an affection will be equal to a length, which
is impossible. But is it not only when an equal motion is accomplished
by two things in an equal time that the velocities of the two are
equal? Now an affection cannot be equal to a length. Therefore there
cannot be an alteration equal to or less than a locomotion: and consequently
it is not the case that every motion is commensurable with every other.

But how will our conclusion work out in the case of the circle and
the straight line? It would be absurd to suppose that the motion of
one in a circle and of another in a straight line cannot be similar,
but that the one must inevitably move more quickly or more slowly
than the other, just as if the course of one were downhill and of
the other uphill. Moreover it does not as a matter of fact make any
difference to the argument to say that the one motion must inevitably
be quicker or slower than the other: for then the circumference can
be greater or less than the straight line; and if so it is possible
for the two to be equal. For if in the time A the quicker (B) passes
over the distance B' and the slower (G) passes over the distance G',
B' will be greater than G': for this is what we took 'quicker' to
mean: and so quicker motion also implies that one thing traverses
an equal distance in less time than another: consequently there will
be a part of A in which B will pass over a part of the circle equal
to G', while G will occupy the whole of A in passing over G'. None
the less, if the two motions are commensurable, we are confronted
with the consequence stated above, viz. that there may be a straight
line equal to a circle. But these are not commensurable: and so the
corresponding motions are not commensurable either. 

But may we say that things are always commensurable if the same terms
are applied to them without equivocation? e.g. a pen, a wine, and
the highest note in a scale are not commensurable: we cannot say whether
any one of them is sharper than any other: and why is this? they are
incommensurable because it is only equivocally that the same term
'sharp' is applied to them: whereas the highest note in a scale is
commensurable with the leading-note, because the term 'sharp' has
the same meaning as applied to both. Can it be, then, that the term
'quick' has not the same meaning as applied to straight motion and
to circular motion respectively? If so, far less will it have the
same meaning as applied to alteration and to locomotion.

Or shall we in the first place deny that things are always commensurable
if the same terms are applied to them without equivocation? For the
term 'much' has the same meaning whether applied to water or to air,
yet water and air are not commensurable in respect of it: or, if this
illustration is not considered satisfactory, 'double' at any rate
would seem to have the same meaning as applied to each (denoting in
each case the proportion of two to one), yet water and air are not
commensurable in respect of it. But here again may we not take up
the same position and say that the term 'much' is equivocal? In fact
there are some terms of which even the definitions are equivocal;
e.g. if 'much' were defined as 'so much and more','so much' would
mean something different in different cases: 'equal' is similarly
equivocal; and 'one' again is perhaps inevitably an equivocal term;
and if 'one' is equivocal, so is 'two'. Otherwise why is it that some
things are commensurable while others are not, if the nature of the
attribute in the two cases is really one and the same? 

Can it be that the incommensurability of two things in respect of
any attribute is due to a difference in that which is primarily capable
of carrying the attribute? Thus horse and dog are so commensurable
that we may say which is the whiter, since that which primarily contains
the whiteness is the same in both, viz. the surface: and similarly
they are commensurable in respect of size. But water and speech are
not commensurable in respect of clearness, since that which primarily
contains the attribute is different in the two cases. It would seem,
however that we must reject this solution, since clearly we could
thus make all equivocal attributes univocal and say merely that that
contains each of them is different in different cases: thus 'equality',
'sweetness', and 'whiteness' will severally always be the same, though
that which contains them is different in different cases. Moreover,
it is not any casual thing that is capable of carrying any attribute:
each single attribute can be carried primarily only by one single
thing. 

Must we then say that, if two things are to be commensurable in respect
of any attribute, not only must the attribute in question be applicable
to both without equivocation, but there must also be no specific differences
either in the attribute itself or in that which contains the attribute-that
these, I mean, must not be divisible in the way in which colour is
divided into kinds? Thus in this respect one thing will not be commensurable
with another, i.e. we cannot say that one is more coloured than the
other where only colour in general and not any particular colour is
meant; but they are commensurable in respect of whiteness.

Similarly in the case of motion: two things are of the same velocity
if they occupy an equal time in accomplishing a certain equal amount
of motion. Suppose, then, that in a certain time an alteration is
undergone by one half of a body's length and a locomotion is accomplished
the other half: can be say that in this case the alteration is equal
to the locomotion and of the same velocity? That would be absurd,
and the reason is that there are different species of motion. And
if in consequence of this we must say that two things are of equal
velocity if they accomplish locomotion over an equal distance in an
equal time, we have to admit the equality of a straight line and a
circumference. What, then, is the reason of this? Is it that locomotion
is a genus or that line is a genus? (We may leave the time out of
account, since that is one and the same.) If the lines are specifically
different, the locomotions also differ specifically from one another:
for locomotion is specifically differentiated according to the specific
differentiation of that over which it takes place. (It is also similarly
differentiated, it would seem, accordingly as the instrument of the
locomotion is different: thus if feet are the instrument, it is walking,
if wings it is flying; but perhaps we should rather say that this
is not so, and that in this case the differences in the locomotion
are merely differences of posture in that which is in motion.) We
may say, therefore, that things are of equal velocity in an equal
time they traverse the same magnitude: and when I call it 'the same'
I mean that it contains no specific difference and therefore no difference
in the motion that takes place over it. So we have now to consider
how motion is differentiated: and this discussion serves to show that
the genus is not a unity but contains a plurality latent in it and
distinct from it, and that in the case of equivocal terms sometimes
the different senses in which they are used are far removed from one
another, while sometimes there is a certain likeness between them,
and sometimes again they are nearly related either generically or
analogically, with the result that they seem not to be equivocal though
they really are. 

When, then, is there a difference of species? Is an attribute specifically
different if the subject is different while the attribute is the same,
or must the attribute itself be different as well? And how are we
to define the limits of a species? What will enable us to decide that
particular instances of whiteness or sweetness are the same or different?
Is it enough that it appears different in one subject from what appears
in another? Or must there be no sameness at all? And further, where
alteration is in question, how is one alteration to be of equal velocity
with another? One person may be cured quickly and another slowly,
and cures may also be simultaneous: so that, recovery of health being
an alteration, we have here alterations of equal velocity, since each
alteration occupies an equal time. But what alteration? We cannot
here speak of an 'equal' alteration: what corresponds in the category
of quality to equality in the category of quantity is 'likeness'.
However, let us say that there is equal velocity where the same change
is accomplished in an equal time. Are we, then, to find the commensurability
in the subject of the affection or in the affection itself? In the
case that we have just been considering it is the fact that health
is one and the same that enables us to arrive at the conclusion that
the one alteration is neither more nor less than the other, but that
both are alike. If on the other hand the affection is different in
the two cases, e.g. when the alterations take the form of becoming
white and becoming healthy respectively, here there is no sameness
or equality or likeness inasmuch as the difference in the affections
at once makes the alterations specifically different, and there is
no unity of alteration any more than there would be unity of locomotion
under like conditions. So we must find out how many species there
are of alteration and of locomotion respectively. Now if the things
that are in motion-that is to say, the things to which the motions
belong essentially and not accidentally-differ specifically, then
their respective motions will also differ specifically: if on the
other hand they differ generically or numerically, the motions also
will differ generically or numerically as the case may be. But there
still remains the question whether, supposing that two alterations
are of equal velocity, we ought to look for this equality in the sameness
(or likeness) of the affections, or in the things altered, to see
e.g. whether a certain quantity of each has become white. Or ought
we not rather to look for it in both? That is to say, the alterations
are the same or different according as the affections are the same
or different, while they are equal or unequal according as the things
altered are equal or unequal. 

And now we must consider the same question in the case of becoming
and perishing: how is one becoming of equal velocity with another?
They are of equal velocity if in an equal time there are produced
two things that are the same and specifically inseparable, e.g. two
men (not merely generically inseparable as e.g. two animals). Similarly
one is quicker than the other if in an equal time the product is different
in the two cases. I state it thus because we have no pair of terms
that will convey this 'difference' in the way in which unlikeness
is conveyed. If we adopt the theory that it is number that constitutes
being, we may indeed speak of a 'greater number' and a 'lesser number'
within the same species, but there is no common term that will include
both relations, nor are there terms to express each of them separately
in the same way as we indicate a higher degree or preponderance of
an affection by 'more', of a quantity by 'greater.' 

Part 5

Now since wherever there is a movent, its motion always acts upon
something, is always in something, and always extends to something
(by 'is always in something' I mean that it occupies a time: and by
'extends to something' I mean that it involves the traversing of a
certain amount of distance: for at any moment when a thing is causing
motion, it also has caused motion, so that there must always be a
certain amount of distance that has been traversed and a certain amount
of time that has been occupied). then, A the movement have moved B
a distance G in a time D, then in the same time the same force A will
move 1/2B twice the distance G, and in 1/2D it will move 1/2B the
whole distance for G: thus the rules of proportion will be observed.
Again if a given force move a given weight a certain distance in a
certain time and half the distance in half the time, half the motive
power will move half the weight the same distance in the same time.
Let E represent half the motive power A and Z half the weight B: then
the ratio between the motive power and the weight in the one case
is similar and proportionate to the ratio in the other, so that each
force will cause the same distance to be traversed in the same time.
But if E move Z a distance G in a time D, it does not necessarily
follow that E can move twice Z half the distance G in the same time.
If, then, A move B a distance G in a time D, it does not follow that
E, being half of A, will in the time D or in any fraction of it cause
B to traverse a part of G the ratio between which and the whole of
G is proportionate to that between A and E (whatever fraction of AE
may be): in fact it might well be that it will cause no motion at
all; for it does not follow that, if a given motive power causes a
certain amount of motion, half that power will cause motion either
of any particular amount or in any length of time: otherwise one man
might move a ship, since both the motive power of the ship-haulers
and the distance that they all cause the ship to traverse are divisible
into as many parts as there are men. Hence Zeno's reasoning is false
when he argues that there is no part of the millet that does not make
a sound: for there is no reason why any such part should not in any
length of time fail to move the air that the whole bushel moves in
falling. In fact it does not of itself move even such a quantity of
the air as it would move if this part were by itself: for no part
even exists otherwise than potentially. 

If on the other hand we have two forces each of which separately moves
one of two weights a given distance in a given time, then the forces
in combination will move the combined weights an equal distance in
an equal time: for in this case the rules of proportion apply.

Then does this hold good of alteration and of increase also? Surely
it does, for in any given case we have a definite thing that cause
increase and a definite thing that suffers increase, and the one causes
and the other suffers a certain amount of increase in a certain amount
of time. Similarly we have a definite thing that causes alteration
and a definite thing that undergoes alteration, and a certain amount,
or rather degree, of alteration is completed in a certain amount of
time: thus in twice as much time twice as much alteration will be
completed and conversely twice as much alteration will occupy twice
as much time: and the alteration of half of its object will occupy
half as much time and in half as much time half of the object will
be altered: or again, in the same amount of time it will be altered
twice as much. 

On the other hand if that which causes alteration or increase causes
a certain amount of increase or alteration respectively in a certain
amount of time, it does not necessarily follow that half the force
will occupy twice the time in altering or increasing the object, or
that in twice the time the alteration or increase will be completed
by it: it may happen that there will be no alteration or increase
at all, the case being the same as with the weight. 



BOOK VIII

Part 1 

It remains to consider the following question. Was there ever a becoming
of motion before which it had no being, and is it perishing again
so as to leave nothing in motion? Or are we to say that it never had
any becoming and is not perishing, but always was and always will
be? Is it in fact an immortal never-failing property of things that
are, a sort of life as it were to all naturally constituted things?

Now the existence of motion is asserted by all who have anything to
say about nature, because they all concern themselves with the construction
of the world and study the question of becoming and perishing, which
processes could not come about without the existence of motion. But
those who say that there is an infinite number of worlds, some of
which are in process of becoming while others are in process of perishing,
assert that there is always motion (for these processes of becoming
and perishing of the worlds necessarily involve motion), whereas those
who hold that there is only one world, whether everlasting or not,
make corresponding assumptions in regard to motion. If then it is
possible that at any time nothing should be in motion, this must come
about in one of two ways: either in the manner described by Anaxagoras,
who says that all things were together and at rest for an infinite
period of time, and that then Mind introduced motion and separated
them; or in the manner described by Empedocles, according to whom
the universe is alternately in motion and at rest-in motion, when
Love is making the one out of many, or Strife is making many out of
one, and at rest in the intermediate periods of time-his account being
as follows: 

'Since One hath learned to spring from Manifold, And One disjoined
makes manifold arise, Thus they Become, nor stable is their life:
But since their motion must alternate be, Thus have they ever Rest
upon their round': for we must suppose that he means by this that
they alternate from the one motion to the other. We must consider,
then, how this matter stands, for the discovery of the truth about
it is of importance, not only for the study of nature, but also for
the investigation of the First Principle. 

Let us take our start from what we have already laid down in our course
on Physics. Motion, we say, is the fulfilment of the movable in so
far as it is movable. Each kind of motion, therefore, necessarily
involves the presence of the things that are capable of that motion.
In fact, even apart from the definition of motion, every one would
admit that in each kind of motion it is that which is capable of that
motion that is in motion: thus it is that which is capable of alteration
that is altered, and that which is capable of local change that is
in locomotion: and so there must be something capable of being burned
before there can be a process of being burned, and something capable
of burning before there can be a process of burning. Moreover, these
things also must either have a beginning before which they had no
being, or they must be eternal. Now if there was a becoming of every
movable thing, it follows that before the motion in question another
change or motion must have taken place in which that which was capable
of being moved or of causing motion had its becoming. To suppose,
on the other hand, that these things were in being throughout all
previous time without there being any motion appears unreasonable
on a moment's thought, and still more unreasonable, we shall find,
on further consideration. For if we are to say that, while there are
on the one hand things that are movable, and on the other hand things
that are motive, there is a time when there is a first movent and
a first moved, and another time when there is no such thing but only
something that is at rest, then this thing that is at rest must previously
have been in process of change: for there must have been some cause
of its rest, rest being the privation of motion. Therefore, before
this first change there will be a previous change. For some things
cause motion in only one way, while others can produce either of two
contrary motions: thus fire causes heating but not cooling, whereas
it would seem that knowledge may be directed to two contrary ends
while remaining one and the same. Even in the former class, however,
there seems to be something similar, for a cold thing in a sense causes
heating by turning away and retiring, just as one possessed of knowledge
voluntarily makes an error when he uses his knowledge in the reverse
way. But at any rate all things that are capable respectively of affecting
and being affected, or of causing motion and being moved, are capable
of it not under all conditions, but only when they are in a particular
condition and approach one another: so it is on the approach of one
thing to another that the one causes motion and the other is moved,
and when they are present under such conditions as rendered the one
motive and the other movable. So if the motion was not always in process,
it is clear that they must have been in a condition not such as to
render them capable respectively of being moved and of causing motion,
and one or other of them must have been in process of change: for
in what is relative this is a necessary consequence: e.g. if one thing
is double another when before it was not so, one or other of them,
if not both, must have been in process of change. It follows then,
that there will be a process of change previous to the first.

(Further, how can there be any 'before' and 'after' without the existence
of time? Or how can there be any time without the existence of motion?
If, then, time is the number of motion or itself a kind of motion,
it follows that, if there is always time, motion must also be eternal.
But so far as time is concerned we see that all with one exception
are in agreement in saying that it is uncreated: in fact, it is just
this that enables Democritus to show that all things cannot have had
a becoming: for time, he says, is uncreated. Plato alone asserts the
creation of time, saying that it had a becoming together with the
universe, the universe according to him having had a becoming. Now
since time cannot exist and is unthinkable apart from the moment,
and the moment a kind of middle-point, uniting as it does in itself
both a beginning and an end, a beginning of future time and an end
of past time, it follows that there must always be time: for the extremity
of the last period of time that we take must be found in some moment,
since time contains no point of contact for us except the moment.
Therefore, since the moment is both a beginning and an end, there
must always be time on both sides of it. But if this is true of time,
it is evident that it must also be true of motion, time being a kind
of affection of motion.) 

The same reasoning will also serve to show the imperishability of
motion: just as a becoming of motion would involve, as we saw, the
existence of a process of change previous to the first, in the same
way a perishing of motion would involve the existence of a process
of change subsequent to the last: for when a thing ceases to be moved,
it does not therefore at the same time cease to be movable-e.g. the
cessation of the process of being burned does not involve the cessation
of the capacity of being burned, since a thing may be capable of being
burned without being in process of being burned-nor, when a thing
ceases to be movent, does it therefore at the same time cease to a
be motive. Again, the destructive agent will have to be destroyed,
after what it destroys has been destroyed, and then that which has
the capacity of destroying it will have to be destroyed afterwards,
(so that there will be a process of change subsequent to the last,)
for being destroyed also is a kind of change. If, then, view which
we are criticizing involves these impossible consequences, it is clear
that motion is eternal and cannot have existed at one time and not
at another: in fact such a view can hardly be described as anythling
else than fantastic. 

And much the same may be said of the view that such is the ordinance
of nature and that this must be regarded as a principle, as would
seem to be the view of Empedocles when he says that the constitution
of the world is of necessity such that Love and Strife alternately
predominate and cause motion, while in the intermediate period of
time there is a state of rest. Probably also those who like like Anaxagoras,
assert a single principle (of motion) would hold this view. But that
which is produced or directed by nature can never be anything disorderly:
for nature is everywhere the cause of order. Moreover, there is no
ratio in the relation of the infinite to the infinite, whereas order
always means ratio. But if we say that there is first a state of rest
for an infinite time, and then motion is started at some moment, and
that the fact that it is this rather than a previous moment is of
no importance, and involves no order, then we can no longer say that
it is nature's work: for if anything is of a certain character naturally,
it either is so invariably and is not sometimes of this and sometimes
of another character (e.g. fire, which travels upwards naturally,
does not sometimes do so and sometimes not) or there is a ratio in
the variation. It would be better, therefore, to say with Empedocles
and any one else who may have maintained such a theory as his that
the universe is alternately at rest and in motion: for in a system
of this kind we have at once a certain order. But even here the holder
of the theory ought not only to assert the fact: he ought to explain
the cause of it: i.e. he should not make any mere assumption or lay
down any gratuitous axiom, but should employ either inductive or demonstrative
reasoning. The Love and Strife postulated by Empedocles are not in
themselves causes of the fact in question, nor is it of the essence
of either that it should be so, the essential function of the former
being to unite, of the latter to separate. If he is to go on to explain
this alternate predominance, he should adduce cases where such a state
of things exists, as he points to the fact that among mankind we have
something that unites men, namely Love, while on the other hand enemies
avoid one another: thus from the observed fact that this occurs in
certain cases comes the assumption that it occurs also in the universe.
Then, again, some argument is needed to explain why the predominance
of each of the two forces lasts for an equal period of time. But it
is a wrong assumption to suppose universally that we have an adequate
first principle in virtue of the fact that something always is so
or always happens so. Thus Democritus reduces the causes that explain
nature to the fact that things happened in the past in the same way
as they happen now: but he does not think fit to seek for a first
principle to explain this 'always': so, while his theory is right
in so far as it is applied to certain individual cases, he is wrong
in making it of universal application. Thus, a triangle always has
its angles equal to two right angles, but there is nevertheless an
ulterior cause of the eternity of this truth, whereas first principles
are eternal and have no ulterior cause. Let this conclude what we
have to say in support of our contention that there never was a time
when there was not motion, and never will be a time when there will
not be motion. 

Part 2

The arguments that may be advanced against this position are not difficult
to dispose of. The chief considerations that might be thought to indicate
that motion may exist though at one time it had not existed at all
are the following: 

First, it may be said that no process of change is eternal: for the
nature of all change is such that it proceeds from something to something,
so that every process of change must be bounded by the contraries
that mark its course, and no motion can go on to infinity.

Secondly, we see that a thing that neither is in motion nor contains
any motion within itself can be set in motion; e.g. inanimate things
that are (whether the whole or some part is in question) not in motion
but at rest, are at some moment set in motion: whereas, if motion
cannot have a becoming before which it had no being, these things
ought to be either always or never in motion. 

Thirdly, the fact is evident above all in the case of animate beings:
for it sometimes happens that there is no motion in us and we are
quite still, and that nevertheless we are then at some moment set
in motion, that is to say it sometimes happens that we produce a beginning
of motion in ourselves spontaneously without anything having set us
in motion from without. We see nothing like this in the case of inanimate
things, which are always set in motion by something else from without:
the animal, on the other hand, we say, moves itself: therefore, if
an animal is ever in a state of absolute rest, we have a motionless
thing in which motion can be produced from the thing itself, and not
from without. Now if this can occur in an animal, why should not the
same be true also of the universe as a whole? If it can occur in a
small world it could also occur in a great one: and if it can occur
in the world, it could also occur in the infinite; that is, if the
infinite could as a whole possibly be in motion or at rest.

Of these objections, then, the first-mentioned motion to opposites
is not always the same and numerically one a correct statement; in
fact, this may be said to be a necessary conclusion, provided that
it is possible for the motion of that which is one and the same to
be not always one and the same. (I mean that e.g. we may question
whether the note given by a single string is one and the same, or
is different each time the string is struck, although the string is
in the same condition and is moved in the same way.) But still, however
this may be, there is nothing to prevent there being a motion that
is the same in virtue of being continuous and eternal: we shall have
something to say later that will make this point clearer.

As regards the second objection, no absurdity is involved in the fact
that something not in motion may be set in motion, that which caused
the motion from without being at one time present, and at another
absent. Nevertheless, how this can be so remains matter for inquiry;
how it comes about, I mean, that the same motive force at one time
causes a thing to be in motion, and at another does not do so: for
the difficulty raised by our objector really amounts to this-why is
it that some things are not always at rest, and the rest always in
motion? 

The third objection may be thought to present more difficulty than
the others, namely, that which alleges that motion arises in things
in which it did not exist before, and adduces in proof the case of
animate things: thus an animal is first at rest and afterwards walks,
not having been set in motion apparently by anything from without.
This, however, is false: for we observe that there is always some
part of the animal's organism in motion, and the cause of the motion
of this part is not the animal itself, but, it may be, its environment.
Moreover, we say that the animal itself originates not all of its
motions but its locomotion. So it may well be the case-or rather we
may perhaps say that it must necessarily be the case-that many motions
are produced in the body by its environment, and some of these set
in motion the intellect or the appetite, and this again then sets
the whole animal in motion: this is what happens when animals are
asleep: though there is then no perceptive motion in them, there is
some motion that causes them to wake up again. But we will leave this
point also to be elucidated at a later stage in our discussion.

Part 3

Our enquiry will resolve itself at the outset into a consideration
of the above-mentioned problem-what can be the reason why some things
in the world at one time are in motion and at another are at rest
again? Now one of three things must be true: either all things are
always at rest, or all things are always in motion, or some things
are in motion and others at rest: and in this last case again either
the things that are in motion are always in motion and the things
that are at rest are always at rest, or they are all constituted so
as to be capable alike of motion and of rest; or there is yet a third
possibility remaining-it may be that some things in the world are
always motionless, others always in motion, while others again admit
of both conditions. This last is the account of the matter that we
must give: for herein lies the solution of all the difficulties raised
and the conclusion of the investigation upon which we are engaged.

To maintain that all things are at rest, and to disregard sense-perception
in an attempt to show the theory to be reasonable, would be an instance
of intellectual weakness: it would call in question a whole system,
not a particular detail: moreover, it would be an attack not only
on the physicist but on almost all sciences and all received opinions,
since motion plays a part in all of them. Further, just as in arguments
about mathematics objections that involve first principles do not
affect the mathematician-and the other sciences are in similar case-so,
too, objections involving the point that we have just raised do not
affect the physicist: for it is a fundamental assumption with him
that motion is ultimately referable to nature herself. 

The assertion that all things are in motion we may fairly regard as
equally false, though it is less subversive of physical science: for
though in our course on physics it was laid down that rest no less
than motion is ultimately referable to nature herself, nevertheless
motion is the characteristic fact of nature: moreover, the view is
actually held by some that not merely some things but all things in
the world are in motion and always in motion, though we cannot apprehend
the fact by sense-perception. Although the supporters of this theory
do not state clearly what kind of motion they mean, or whether they
mean all kinds, it is no hard matter to reply to them: thus we may
point out that there cannot be a continuous process either of increase
or of decrease: that which comes between the two has to be included.
The theory resembles that about the stone being worn away by the drop
of water or split by plants growing out of it: if so much has been
extruded or removed by the drop, it does not follow that half the
amount has previously been extruded or removed in half the time: the
case of the hauled ship is exactly comparable: here we have so many
drops setting so much in motion, but a part of them will not set as
much in motion in any period of time. The amount removed is, it is
true, divisible into a number of parts, but no one of these was set
in motion separately: they were all set in motion together. It is
evident, then, that from the fact that the decrease is divisible into
an infinite number of parts it does not follow that some part must
always be passing away: it all passes away at a particular moment.
Similarly, too, in the case of any alteration whatever if that which
suffers alteration is infinitely divisible it does not follow from
this that the same is true of the alteration itself, which often occurs
all at once, as in freezing. Again, when any one has fallen ill, there
must follow a period of time in which his restoration to health is
in the future: the process of change cannot take place in an instant:
yet the change cannot be a change to anything else but health. The
assertion. therefore, that alteration is continuous is an extravagant
calling into question of the obvious: for alteration is a change from
one contrary to another. Moreover, we notice that a stone becomes
neither harder nor softer. Again, in the matter of locomotion, it
would be a strange thing if a stone could be falling or resting on
the ground without our being able to perceive the fact. Further, it
is a law of nature that earth and all other bodies should remain in
their proper places and be moved from them only by violence: from
the fact then that some of them are in their proper places it follows
that in respect of place also all things cannot be in motion. These
and other similar arguments, then, should convince us that it is impossible
either that all things are always in motion or that all things are
always at rest. 

Nor again can it be that some things are always at rest, others always
in motion, and nothing sometimes at rest and sometimes in motion.
This theory must be pronounced impossible on the same grounds as those
previously mentioned: viz. that we see the above-mentioned changes
occurring in the case of the same things. We may further point out
that the defender of this position is fighting against the obvious,
for on this theory there can be no such thing as increase: nor can
there be any such thing as compulsory motion, if it is impossible
that a thing can be at rest before being set in motion unnaturally.
This theory, then, does away with becoming and perishing. Moreover,
motion, it would seem, is generally thought to be a sort of becoming
and perishing, for that to which a thing changes comes to be, or occupancy
of it comes to be, and that from which a thing changes ceases to be,
or there ceases to be occupancy of it. It is clear, therefore, that
there are cases of occasional motion and occasional rest.

We have now to take the assertion that all things are sometimes at
rest and sometimes in motion and to confront it with the arguments
previously advanced. We must take our start as before from the possibilities
that we distinguished just above. Either all things are at rest, or
all things are in motion, or some things are at rest and others in
motion. And if some things are at rest and others in motion, then
it must be that either all things are sometimes at rest and sometimes
in motion, or some things are always at rest and the remainder always
in motion, or some of the things are always at rest and others always
in motion while others again are sometimes at rest and sometimes in
motion. Now we have said before that it is impossible that all things
should be at rest: nevertheless we may now repeat that assertion.
We may point out that, even if it is really the case, as certain persons
assert, that the existent is infinite and motionless, it certainly
does not appear to be so if we follow sense-perception: many things
that exist appear to be in motion. Now if there is such a thing as
false opinion or opinion at all, there is also motion; and similarly
if there is such a thing as imagination, or if it is the case that
anything seems to be different at different times: for imagination
and opinion are thought to be motions of a kind. But to investigate
this question at all-to seek a reasoned justification of a belief
with regard to which we are too well off to require reasoned justification-implies
bad judgement of what is better and what is worse, what commends itself
to belief and what does not, what is ultimate and what is not. It
is likewise impossible that all things should be in motion or that
some things should be always in motion and the remainder always at
rest. We have sufficient ground for rejecting all these theories in
the single fact that we see some things that are sometimes in motion
and sometimes at rest. It is evident, therefore, that it is no less
impossible that some things should be always in motion and the remainder
always at rest than that all things should be at rest or that all
things should be in motion continuously. It remains, then, to consider
whether all things are so constituted as to be capable both of being
in motion and of being at rest, or whether, while some things are
so constituted, some are always at rest and some are always in motion:
for it is this last view that we have to show to be true.

Part 4

Now of things that cause motion or suffer motion, to some the motion
is accidental, to others essential: thus it is accidental to what
merely belongs to or contains as a part a thing that causes motion
or suffers motion, essential to a thing that causes motion or suffers
motion not merely by belonging to such a thing or containing it as
a part. 

Of things to which the motion is essential some derive their motion
from themselves, others from something else: and in some cases their
motion is natural, in others violent and unnatural. Thus in things
that derive their motion from themselves, e.g. all animals, the motion
is natural (for when an animal is in motion its motion is derived
from itself): and whenever the source of the motion of a thing is
in the thing itself we say that the motion of that thing is natural.
Therefore the animal as a whole moves itself naturally: but the body
of the animal may be in motion unnaturally as well as naturally: it
depends upon the kind of motion that it may chance to be suffering
and the kind of element of which it is composed. And the motion of
things that derive their motion from something else is in some cases
natural, in other unnatural: e.g. upward motion of earthy things and
downward motion of fire are unnatural. Moreover the parts of animals
are often in motion in an unnatural way, their positions and the character
of the motion being abnormal. The fact that a thing that is in motion
derives its motion from something is most evident in things that are
in motion unnaturally, because in such cases it is clear that the
motion is derived from something other than the thing itself. Next
to things that are in motion unnaturally those whose motion while
natural is derived from themselves-e.g. animals-make this fact clear:
for here the uncertainty is not as to whether the motion is derived
from something but as to how we ought to distinguish in the thing
between the movent and the moved. It would seem that in animals, just
as in ships and things not naturally organized, that which causes
motion is separate from that which suffers motion, and that it is
only in this sense that the animal as a whole causes its own motion.

The greatest difficulty, however, is presented by the remaining case
of those that we last distinguished. Where things derive their motion
from something else we distinguished the cases in which the motion
is unnatural: we are left with those that are to be contrasted with
the others by reason of the fact that the motion is natural. It is
in these cases that difficulty would be experienced in deciding whence
the motion is derived, e.g. in the case of light and heavy things.
When these things are in motion to positions the reverse of those
they would properly occupy, their motion is violent: when they are
in motion to their proper positions-the light thing up and the heavy
thing down-their motion is natural; but in this latter case it is
no longer evident, as it is when the motion is unnatural, whence their
motion is derived. It is impossible to say that their motion is derived
from themselves: this is a characteristic of life and peculiar to
living things. Further, if it were, it would have been in their power
to stop themselves (I mean that if e.g. a thing can cause itself to
walk it can also cause itself not to walk), and so, since on this
supposition fire itself possesses the power of upward locomotion,
it is clear that it should also possess the power of downward locomotion.
Moreover if things move themselves, it would be unreasonable to suppose
that in only one kind of motion is their motion derived from themselves.
Again, how can anything of continuous and naturally connected substance
move itself? In so far as a thing is one and continuous not merely
in virtue of contact, it is impassive: it is only in so far as a thing
is divided that one part of it is by nature active and another passive.
Therefore none of the things that we are now considering move themselves
(for they are of naturally connected substance), nor does anything
else that is continuous: in each case the movent must be separate
from the moved, as we see to be the case with inanimate things when
an animate thing moves them. It is the fact that these things also
always derive their motion from something: what it is would become
evident if we were to distinguish the different kinds of cause.

The above-mentioned distinctions can also be made in the case of things
that cause motion: some of them are capable of causing motion unnaturally
(e.g. the lever is not naturally capable of moving the weight), others
naturally (e.g. what is actually hot is naturally capable of moving
what is potentially hot): and similarly in the case of all other things
of this kind. 

In the same way, too, what is potentially of a certain quality or
of a certain quantity in a certain place is naturally movable when
it contains the corresponding principle in itself and not accidentally
(for the same thing may be both of a certain quality and of a certain
quantity, but the one is an accidental, not an essential property
of the other). So when fire or earth is moved by something the motion
is violent when it is unnatural, and natural when it brings to actuality
the proper activities that they potentially possess. But the fact
that the term 'potentially' is used in more than one sense is the
reason why it is not evident whence such motions as the upward motion
of fire and the downward motion of earth are derived. One who is learning
a science potentially knows it in a different sense from one who while
already possessing the knowledge is not actually exercising it. Wherever
we have something capable of acting and something capable of being
correspondingly acted on, in the event of any such pair being in contact
what is potential becomes at times actual: e.g. the learner becomes
from one potential something another potential something: for one
who possesses knowledge of a science but is not actually exercising
it knows the science potentially in a sense, though not in the same
sense as he knew it potentially before he learnt it. And when he is
in this condition, if something does not prevent him, he actively
exercises his knowledge: otherwise he would be in the contradictory
state of not knowing. In regard to natural bodies also the case is
similar. Thus what is cold is potentially hot: then a change takes
place and it is fire, and it burns, unless something prevents and
hinders it. So, too, with heavy and light: light is generated from
heavy, e.g. air from water (for water is the first thing that is potentially
light), and air is actually light, and will at once realize its proper
activity as such unless something prevents it. The activity of lightness
consists in the light thing being in a certain situation, namely high
up: when it is in the contrary situation, it is being prevented from
rising. The case is similar also in regard to quantity and quality.
But, be it noted, this is the question we are trying to answer-how
can we account for the motion of light things and heavy things to
their proper situations? The reason for it is that they have a natural
tendency respectively towards a certain position: and this constitutes
the essence of lightness and heaviness, the former being determined
by an upward, the latter by a downward, tendency. As we have said,
a thing may be potentially light or heavy in more senses than one.
Thus not only when a thing is water is it in a sense potentially light,
but when it has become air it may be still potentially light: for
it may be that through some hindrance it does not occupy an upper
position, whereas, if what hinders it is removed, it realizes its
activity and continues to rise higher. The process whereby what is
of a certain quality changes to a condition of active existence is
similar: thus the exercise of knowledge follows at once upon the possession
of it unless something prevents it. So, too, what is of a certain
quantity extends itself over a certain space unless something prevents
it. The thing in a sense is and in a sense is not moved by one who
moves what is obstructing and preventing its motion (e.g. one who
pulls away a pillar from under a roof or one who removes a stone from
a wineskin in the water is the accidental cause of motion): and in
the same way the real cause of the motion of a ball rebounding from
a wall is not the wall but the thrower. So it is clear that in all
these cases the thing does not move itself, but it contains within
itself the source of motion-not of moving something or of causing
motion, but of suffering it. 

If then the motion of all things that are in motion is either natural
or unnatural and violent, and all things whose motion is violent and
unnatural are moved by something, and something other than themselves,
and again all things whose motion is natural are moved by something-both
those that are moved by themselves and those that are not moved by
themselves (e.g. light things and heavy things, which are moved either
by that which brought the thing into existence as such and made it
light and heavy, or by that which released what was hindering and
preventing it); then all things that are in motion must be moved by
something. 

Part 5

Now this may come about in either of two ways. Either the movent is
not itself responsible for the motion, which is to be referred to
something else which moves the movent, or the movent is itself responsible
for the motion. Further, in the latter case, either the movent immediately
precedes the last thing in the series, or there may be one or more
intermediate links: e.g. the stick moves the stone and is moved by
the hand, which again is moved by the man: in the man, however, we
have reached a movent that is not so in virtue of being moved by something
else. Now we say that the thing is moved both by the last and by the
first movent in the series, but more strictly by the first, since
the first movent moves the last, whereas the last does not move the
first, and the first will move the thing without the last, but the
last will not move it without the first: e.g. the stick will not move
anything unless it is itself moved by the man. If then everything
that is in motion must be moved by something, and the movent must
either itself be moved by something else or not, and in the former
case there must be some first movent that is not itself moved by anything
else, while in the case of the immediate movent being of this kind
there is no need of an intermediate movent that is also moved (for
it is impossible that there should be an infinite series of movents,
each of which is itself moved by something else, since in an infinite
series there is no first term)-if then everything that is in motion
is moved by something, and the first movent is moved but not by anything
else, it much be moved by itself. 

This same argument may also be stated in another way as follows. Every
movent moves something and moves it with something, either with itself
or with something else: e.g. a man moves a thing either himself or
with a stick, and a thing is knocked down either by the wind itself
or by a stone propelled by the wind. But it is impossible for that
with which a thing is moved to move it without being moved by that
which imparts motion by its own agency: on the other hand, if a thing
imparts motion by its own agency, it is not necessary that there should
be anything else with which it imparts motion, whereas if there is
a different thing with which it imparts motion, there must be something
that imparts motion not with something else but with itself, or else
there will be an infinite series. If, then, anything is a movent while
being itself moved, the series must stop somewhere and not be infinite.
Thus, if the stick moves something in virtue of being moved by the
hand, the hand moves the stick: and if something else moves with the
hand, the hand also is moved by something different from itself. So
when motion by means of an instrument is at each stage caused by something
different from the instrument, this must always be preceded by something
else which imparts motion with itself. Therefore, if this last movent
is in motion and there is nothing else that moves it, it must move
itself. So this reasoning also shows that when a thing is moved, if
it is not moved immediately by something that moves itself, the series
brings us at some time or other to a movent of this kind.

And if we consider the matter in yet a third wa Ly we shall get this
same result as follows. If everything that is in motion is moved by
something that is in motion, ether this being in motion is an accidental
attribute of the movents in question, so that each of them moves something
while being itself in motion, but not always because it is itself
in motion, or it is not accidental but an essential attribute. Let
us consider the former alternative. If then it is an accidental attribute,
it is not necessary that that is in motion should be in motion: and
if this is so it is clear that there may be a time when nothing that
exists is in motion, since the accidental is not necessary but contingent.
Now if we assume the existence of a possibility, any conclusion that
we thereby reach will not be an impossibility though it may be contrary
to fact. But the nonexistence of motion is an impossibility: for we
have shown above that there must always be motion. 

Moreover, the conclusion to which we have been led is a reasonable
one. For there must be three things-the moved, the movent, and the
instrument of motion. Now the moved must be in motion, but it need
not move anything else: the instrument of motion must both move something
else and be itself in motion (for it changes together with the moved,
with which it is in contact and continuous, as is clear in the case
of things that move other things locally, in which case the two things
must up to a certain point be in contact): and the movent-that is
to say, that which causes motion in such a manner that it is not merely
the instrument of motion-must be unmoved. Now we have visual experience
of the last term in this series, namely that which has the capacity
of being in motion, but does not contain a motive principle, and also
of that which is in motion but is moved by itself and not by anything
else: it is reasonable, therefore, not to say necessary, to suppose
the existence of the third term also, that which causes motion but
is itself unmoved. So, too, Anaxagoras is right when he says that
Mind is impassive and unmixed, since he makes it the principle of
motion: for it could cause motion in this sense only by being itself
unmoved, and have supreme control only by being unmixed.

We will now take the second alternative. If the movement is not accidentally
but necessarily in motion-so that, if it were not in motion, it would
not move anything-then the movent, in so far as it is in motion, must
be in motion in one of two ways: it is moved either as that is which
is moved with the same kind of motion, or with a different kind-either
that which is heating, I mean, is itself in process of becoming hot,
that which is making healthy in process of becoming healthy, and that
which is causing locomotion in process of locomotion, or else that
which is making healthy is, let us say, in process of locomotion,
and that which is causing locomotion in process of, say, increase.
But it is evident that this is impossible. For if we adopt the first
assumption we have to make it apply within each of the very lowest
species into which motion can be divided: e.g. we must say that if
some one is teaching some lesson in geometry, he is also in process
of being taught that same lesson in geometry, and that if he is throwing
he is in process of being thrown in just the same manner. Or if we
reject this assumption we must say that one kind of motion is derived
from another; e.g. that that which is causing locomotion is in process
of increase, that which is causing this increase is in process of
being altered by something else, and that which is causing this alteration
is in process of suffering some different kind of motion. But the
series must stop somewhere, since the kinds of motion are limited;
and if we say that the process is reversible, and that that which
is causing alteration is in process of locomotion, we do no more than
if we had said at the outset that that which is causing locomotion
is in process of locomotion, and that one who is teaching is in process
of being taught: for it is clear that everything that is moved is
moved by the movent that is further back in the series as well as
by that which immediately moves it: in fact the earlier movent is
that which more strictly moves it. But this is of course impossible:
for it involves the consequence that one who is teaching is in process
of learning what he is teaching, whereas teaching necessarily implies
possessing knowledge, and learning not possessing it. Still more unreasonable
is the consequence involved that, since everything that is moved is
moved by something that is itself moved by something else, everything
that has a capacity for causing motion has as such a corresponding
capacity for being moved: i.e. it will have a capacity for being moved
in the sense in which one might say that everything that has a capacity
for making healthy, and exercises that capacity, has as such a capacity
for being made healthy, and that which has a capacity for building
has as such a capacity for being built. It will have the capacity
for being thus moved either immediately or through one or more links
(as it will if, while everything that has a capacity for causing motion
has as such a capacity for being moved by something else, the motion
that it has the capacity for suffering is not that with which it affects
what is next to it, but a motion of a different kind; e.g. that which
has a capacity for making healthy might as such have a capacity for
learn. the series, however, could be traced back, as we said before,
until at some time or other we arrived at the same kind of motion).
Now the first alternative is impossible, and the second is fantastic:
it is absurd that that which has a capacity for causing alteration
should as such necessarily have a capacity, let us say, for increase.
It is not necessary, therefore, that that which is moved should always
be moved by something else that is itself moved by something else:
so there will be an end to the series. Consequently the first thing
that is in motion will derive its motion either from something that
is at rest or from itself. But if there were any need to consider
which of the two, that which moves itself or that which is moved by
something else, is the cause and principle of motion, every one would
decide the former: for that which is itself independently a cause
is always prior as a cause to that which is so only in virtue of being
itself dependent upon something else that makes it so. 

We must therefore make a fresh start and consider the question; if
a thing moves itself, in what sense and in what manner does it do
so? Now everything that is in motion must be infinitely divisible,
for it has been shown already in our general course on Physics, that
everything that is essentially in motion is continuous. Now it is
impossible that that which moves itself should in its entirety move
itself: for then, while being specifically one and indivisible, it
would as a Whole both undergo and cause the same locomotion or alteration:
thus it would at the same time be both teaching and being taught (the
same thing), or both restoring to and being restored to the same health.
Moreover, we have established the fact that it is the movable that
is moved; and this is potentially, not actually, in motion, but the
potential is in process to actuality, and motion is an incomplete
actuality of the movable. The movent on the other hand is already
in activity: e.g. it is that which is hot that produces heat: in fact,
that which produces the form is always something that possesses it.
Consequently (if a thing can move itself as a whole), the same thing
in respect of the same thing may be at the same time both hot and
not hot. So, too, in every other case where the movent must be described
by the same name in the same sense as the moved. Therefore when a
thing moves itself it is one part of it that is the movent and another
part that is moved. But it is not self-moving in the sense that each
of the two parts is moved by the other part: the following considerations
make this evident. In the first place, if each of the two parts is
to move the other, there will be no first movent. If a thing is moved
by a series of movents, that which is earlier in the series is more
the cause of its being moved than that which comes next, and will
be more truly the movent: for we found that there are two kinds of
movent, that which is itself moved by something else and that which
derives its motion from itself: and that which is further from the
thing that is moved is nearer to the principle of motion than that
which is intermediate. In the second place, there is no necessity
for the movent part to be moved by anything but itself: so it can
only be accidentally that the other part moves it in return. I take
then the possible case of its not moving it: then there will be a
part that is moved and a part that is an unmoved movent. In the third
place, there is no necessity for the movent to be moved in return:
on the contrary the necessity that there should always be motion makes
it necessary that there should be some movent that is either unmoved
or moved by itself. In the fourth place we should then have a thing
undergoing the same motion that it is causing-that which is producing
heat, therefore, being heated. But as a matter of fact that which
primarily moves itself cannot contain either a single part that moves
itself or a number of parts each of which moves itself. For, if the
whole is moved by itself, it must be moved either by some part of
itself or as a whole by itself as a whole. If, then, it is moved in
virtue of some part of it being moved by that part itself, it is this
part that will be the primary self-movent, since, if this part is
separated from the whole, the part will still move itself, but the
whole will do so no longer. If on the other hand the whole is moved
by itself as a whole, it must be accidentally that the parts move
themselves: and therefore, their self-motion not being necessary,
we may take the case of their not being moved by themselves. Therefore
in the whole of the thing we may distinguish that which imparts motion
without itself being moved and that which is moved: for only in this
way is it possible for a thing to be self-moved. Further, if the whole
moves itself we may distinguish in it that which imparts the motion
and that which is moved: so while we say that AB is moved by itself,
we may also say that it is moved by A. And since that which imparts
motion may be either a thing that is moved by something else or a
thing that is unmoved, and that which is moved may be either a thing
that imparts motion to something else or a thing that does not, that
which moves itself must be composed of something that is unmoved but
imparts motion and also of something that is moved but does not necessarily
impart motion but may or may not do so. Thus let A be something that
imparts motion but is unmoved, B something that is moved by A and
moves G, G something that is moved by B but moves nothing (granted
that we eventually arrive at G we may take it that there is only one
intermediate term, though there may be more). Then the whole ABG moves
itself. But if I take away G, AB will move itself, A imparting motion
and B being moved, whereas G will not move itself or in fact be moved
at all. Nor again will BG move itself apart from A: for B imparts
motion only through being moved by something else, not through being
moved by any part of itself. So only AB moves itself. That which moves
itself, therefore, must comprise something that imparts motion but
is unmoved and something that is moved but does not necessarily move
anything else: and each of these two things, or at any rate one of
them, must be in contact with the other. If, then, that which imparts
motion is a continuous substance-that which is moved must of course
be so-it is clear that it is not through some part of the whole being
of such a nature as to be capable of moving itself that the whole
moves itself: it moves itself as a whole, both being moved and imparting
motion through containing a part that imparts motion and a part that
is moved. It does not impart motion as a whole nor is it moved as
a whole: it is A alone that imparts motion and B alone that is moved.
It is not true, further, that G is moved by A, which is impossible.

Here a difficulty arises: if something is taken away from A (supposing
that that which imparts motion but is unmoved is a continuous substance),
or from B the part that is moved, will the remainder of A continue
to impart motion or the remainder of B continue to be moved? If so,
it will not be AB primarily that is moved by itself, since, when something
is taken away from AB, the remainder of AB will still continue to
move itself. Perhaps we may state the case thus: there is nothing
to prevent each of the two parts, or at any rate one of them, that
which is moved, being divisible though actually undivided, so that
if it is divided it will not continue in the possession of the same
capacity: and so there is nothing to prevent self-motion residing
primarily in things that are potentially divisible. 

From what has been said, then, it is evident that that which primarily
imparts motion is unmoved: for, whether the series is closed at once
by that which is in motion but moved by something else deriving its
motion directly from the first unmoved, or whether the motion is derived
from what is in motion but moves itself and stops its own motion,
on both suppositions we have the result that in all cases of things
being in motion that which primarily imparts motion is unmoved.

Part 6

Since there must always be motion without intermission, there must
necessarily be something, one thing or it may be a plurality, that
first imparts motion, and this first movent must be unmoved. Now the
question whether each of the things that are unmoved but impart motion
is eternal is irrelevant to our present argument: but the following
considerations will make it clear that there must necessarily be some
such thing, which, while it has the capacity of moving something else,
is itself unmoved and exempt from all change, which can affect it
neither in an unqualified nor in an accidental sense. Let us suppose,
if any one likes, that in the case of certain things it is possible
for them at different times to be and not to be, without any process
of becoming and perishing (in fact it would seem to be necessary,
if a thing that has not parts at one time is and at another time is
not, that any such thing should without undergoing any process of
change at one time be and at another time not be). And let us further
suppose it possible that some principles that are unmoved but capable
of imparting motion at one time are and at another time are not. Even
so, this cannot be true of all such principles, since there must clearly
be something that causes things that move themselves at one time to
be and at another not to be. For, since nothing that has not parts
can be in motion, that which moves itself must as a whole have magnitude,
though nothing that we have said makes this necessarily true of every
movent. So the fact that some things become and others perish, and
that this is so continuously, cannot be caused by any one of those
things that, though they are unmoved, do not always exist: nor again
can it be caused by any of those which move certain particular things,
while others move other things. The eternity and continuity of the
process cannot be caused either by any one of them singly or by the
sum of them, because this causal relation must be eternal and necessary,
whereas the sum of these movents is infinite and they do not all exist
together. It is clear, then, that though there may be countless instances
of the perishing of some principles that are unmoved but impart motion,
and though many things that move themselves perish and are succeeded
by others that come into being, and though one thing that is unmoved
moves one thing while another moves another, nevertheless there is
something that comprehends them all, and that as something apart from
each one of them, and this it is that is the cause of the fact that
some things are and others are not and of the continuous process of
change: and this causes the motion of the other movents, while they
are the causes of the motion of other things. Motion, then, being
eternal, the first movent, if there is but one, will be eternal also:
if there are more than one, there will be a plurality of such eternal
movents. We ought, however, to suppose that there is one rather than
many, and a finite rather than an infinite number. When the consequences
of either assumption are the same, we should always assume that things
are finite rather than infinite in number, since in things constituted
by nature that which is finite and that which is better ought, if
possible, to be present rather than the reverse: and here it is sufficient
to assume only one movent, the first of unmoved things, which being
eternal will be the principle of motion to everything else.

The following argument also makes it evident that the first movent
must be something that is one and eternal. We have shown that there
must always be motion. That being so, motion must also be continuous,
because what is always is continuous, whereas what is merely in succession
is not continuous. But further, if motion is continuous, it is one:
and it is one only if the movent and the moved that constitute it
are each of them one, since in the event of a thing's being moved
now by one thing and now by another the whole motion will not be continuous
but successive. 

Moreover a conviction that there is a first unmoved something may
be reached not only from the foregoing arguments, but also by considering
again the principles operative in movents. Now it is evident that
among existing things there are some that are sometimes in motion
and sometimes at rest. This fact has served above to make it clear
that it is not true either that all things are in motion or that all
things are at rest or that some things are always at rest and the
remainder always in motion: on this matter proof is supplied by things
that fluctuate between the two and have the capacity of being sometimes
in motion and sometimes at rest. The existence of things of this kind
is clear to all: but we wish to explain also the nature of each of
the other two kinds and show that there are some things that are always
unmoved and some things that are always in motion. In the course of
our argument directed to this end we established the fact that everything
that is in motion is moved by something, and that the movent is either
unmoved or in motion, and that, if it is in motion, it is moved either
by itself or by something else and so on throughout the series: and
so we proceeded to the position that the first principle that directly
causes things that are in motion to be moved is that which moves itself,
and the first principle of the whole series is the unmoved. Further
it is evident from actual observation that there are things that have
the characteristic of moving themselves, e.g. the animal kingdom and
the whole class of living things. This being so, then, the view was
suggested that perhaps it may be possible for motion to come to be
in a thing without having been in existence at all before, because
we see this actually occurring in animals: they are unmoved at one
time and then again they are in motion, as it seems. We must grasp
the fact, therefore, that animals move themselves only with one kind
of motion, and that this is not strictly originated by them. The cause
of it is not derived from the animal itself: it is connected with
other natural motions in animals, which they do not experience through
their own instrumentality, e.g. increase, decrease, and respiration:
these are experienced by every animal while it is at rest and not
in motion in respect of the motion set up by its own agency: here
the motion is caused by the atmosphere and by many things that enter
into the animal: thus in some cases the cause is nourishment: when
it is being digested animals sleep, and when it is being distributed
through the system they awake and move themselves, the first principle
of this motion being thus originally derived from outside. Therefore
animals are not always in continuous motion by their own agency: it
is something else that moves them, itself being in motion and changing
as it comes into relation with each several thing that moves itself.
(Moreover in all these self-moving things the first movent and cause
of their self-motion is itself moved by itself, though in an accidental
sense: that is to say, the body changes its place, so that that which
is in the body changes its place also and is a self-movent through
its exercise of leverage.) Hence we may confidently conclude that
if a thing belongs to the class of unmoved movents that are also themselves
moved accidentally, it is impossible that it should cause continuous
motion. So the necessity that there should be motion continuously
requires that there should be a first movent that is unmoved even
accidentally, if, as we have said, there is to be in the world of
things an unceasing and undying motion, and the world is to remain
permanently self-contained and within the same limits: for if the
first principle is permanent, the universe must also be permanent,
since it is continuous with the first principle. (We must distinguish,
however, between accidental motion of a thing by itself and such motion
by something else, the former being confined to perishable things,
whereas the latter belongs also to certain first principles of heavenly
bodies, of all those, that is to say, that experience more than one
locomotion.) 

And further, if there is always something of this nature, a movent
that is itself unmoved and eternal, then that which is first moved
by it must be eternal. Indeed this is clear also from the consideration
that there would otherwise be no becoming and perishing and no change
of any kind in other things, which require something that is in motion
to move them: for the motion imparted by the unmoved will always be
imparted in the same way and be one and the same, since the unmoved
does not itself change in relation to that which is moved by it. But
that which is moved by something that, though it is in motion, is
moved directly by the unmoved stands in varying relations to the things
that it moves, so that the motion that it causes will not be always
the same: by reason of the fact that it occupies contrary positions
or assumes contrary forms at different times it will produce contrary
motions in each several thing that it moves and will cause it to be
at one time at rest and at another time in motion. 

The foregoing argument, then, has served to clear up the point about
which we raised a difficulty at the outset-why is it that instead
of all things being either in motion or at rest, or some things being
always in motion and the remainder always at rest, there are things
that are sometimes in motion and sometimes not? The cause of this
is now plain: it is because, while some things are moved by an eternal
unmoved movent and are therefore always in motion, other things are
moved by a movent that is in motion and changing, so that they too
must change. But the unmoved movent, as has been said, since it remains
permanently simple and unvarying and in the same state, will cause
motion that is one and simple. 

Part 7

This matter will be made clearer, however, if we start afresh from
another point. We must consider whether it is or is not possible that
there should be a continuous motion, and, if it is possible, which
this motion is, and which is the primary motion: for it is plain that
if there must always be motion, and a particular motion is primary
and continuous, then it is this motion that is imparted by the first
movent, and so it is necessarily one and the same and continuous and
primary. 

Now of the three kinds of motion that there are-motion in respect
of magnitude, motion in respect of affection, and motion in respect
of place-it is this last, which we call locomotion, that must be primary.
This may be shown as follows. It is impossible that there should be
increase without the previous occurrence of alteration: for that which
is increased, although in a sense it is increased by what is like
itself, is in a sense increased by what is unlike itself: thus it
is said that contrary is nourishment to contrary: but growth is effected
only by things becoming like to like. There must be alteration, then,
in that there is this change from contrary to contrary. But the fact
that a thing is altered requires that there should be something that
alters it, something e.g. that makes the potentially hot into the
actually hot: so it is plain that the movent does not maintain a uniform
relation to it but is at one time nearer to and at another farther
from that which is altered: and we cannot have this without locomotion.
If, therefore, there must always be motion, there must also always
be locomotion as the primary motion, and, if there is a primary as
distinguished from a secondary form of locomotion, it must be the
primary form. Again, all affections have their origin in condensation
and rarefaction: thus heavy and light, soft and hard, hot and cold,
are considered to be forms of density and rarity. But condensation
and rarefaction are nothing more than combination and separation,
processes in accordance with which substances are said to become and
perish: and in being combined and separated things must change in
respect of place. And further, when a thing is increased or decreased
its magnitude changes in respect of place. 

Again, there is another point of view from which it will be clearly
seen that locomotion is primary. As in the case of other things so
too in the case of motion the word 'primary' may be used in several
senses. A thing is said to be prior to other things when, if it does
not exist, the others will not exist, whereas it can exist without
the others: and there is also priority in time and priority in perfection
of existence. Let us begin, then, with the first sense. Now there
must be motion continuously, and there may be continuously either
continuous motion or successive motion, the former, however, in a
higher degree than the latter: moreover it is better that it should
be continuous rather than successive motion, and we always assume
the presence in nature of the better, if it be possible: since, then,
continuous motion is possible (this will be proved later: for the
present let us take it for granted), and no other motion can be continuous
except locomotion, locomotion must be primary. For there is no necessity
for the subject of locomotion to be the subject either of increase
or of alteration, nor need it become or perish: on the other hand
there cannot be any one of these processes without the existence of
the continuous motion imparted by the first movent. 

Secondly, locomotion must be primary in time: for this is the only
motion possible for things. It is true indeed that, in the case of
any individual thing that has a becoming, locomotion must be the last
of its motions: for after its becoming it first experiences alteration
and increase, and locomotion is a motion that belongs to such things
only when they are perfected. But there must previously be something
else that is in process of locomotion to be the cause even of the
becoming of things that become, without itself being in process of
becoming, as e.g. the begotten is preceded by what begot it: otherwise
becoming might be thought to be the primary motion on the ground that
the thing must first become. But though this is so in the case of
any individual thing that becomes, nevertheless before anything becomes,
something else must be in motion, not itself becoming but being, and
before this there must again be something else. And since becoming
cannot be primary-for, if it were, everything that is in motion would
be perishable-it is plain that no one of the motions next in order
can be prior to locomotion. By the motions next in order I mean increase
and then alteration, decrease, and perishing. All these are posterior
to becoming: consequently, if not even becoming is prior to locomotion,
then no one of the other processes of change is so either.

Thirdly, that which is in process of becoming appears universally
as something imperfect and proceeding to a first principle: and so
what is posterior in the order of becoming is prior in the order of
nature. Now all things that go through the process of becoming acquire
locomotion last. It is this that accounts for the fact that some living
things, e.g. plants and many kinds of animals, owing to lack of the
requisite organ, are entirely without motion, whereas others acquire
it in the course of their being perfected. Therefore, if the degree
in which things possess locomotion corresponds to the degree in which
they have realized their natural development, then this motion must
be prior to all others in respect of perfection of existence: and
not only for this reason but also because a thing that is in motion
loses its essential character less in the process of locomotion than
in any other kind of motion: it is the only motion that does not involve
a change of being in the sense in which there is a change in quality
when a thing is altered and a change in quantity when a thing is increased
or decreased. Above all it is plain that this motion, motion in respect
of place, is what is in the strictest sense produced by that which
moves itself; but it is the self-movent that we declare to be the
first principle of things that are moved and impart motion and the
primary source to which things that are in motion are to be referred.

It is clear, then, from the foregoing arguments that locomotion is
the primary motion. We have now to show which kind of locomotion is
primary. The same process of reasoning will also make clear at the
same time the truth of the assumption we have made both now and at
a previous stage that it is possible that there should be a motion
that is continuous and eternal. Now it is clear from the following
considerations that no other than locomotion can be continuous. Every
other motion and change is from an opposite to an opposite: thus for
the processes of becoming and perishing the limits are the existent
and the non-existent, for alteration the various pairs of contrary
affections, and for increase and decrease either greatness and smallness
or perfection and imperfection of magnitude: and changes to the respective
contraries are contrary changes. Now a thing that is undergoing any
particular kind of motion, but though previously existent has not
always undergone it, must previously have been at rest so far as that
motion is concerned. It is clear, then, that for the changing thing
the contraries will be states of rest. And we have a similar result
in the case of changes that are not motions: for becoming and perishing,
whether regarded simply as such without qualification or as affecting
something in particular, are opposites: therefore provided it is impossible
for a thing to undergo opposite changes at the same time, the change
will not be continuous, but a period of time will intervene between
the opposite processes. The question whether these contradictory changes
are contraries or not makes no difference, provided only it is impossible
for them both to be present to the same thing at the same time: the
point is of no importance to the argument. Nor does it matter if the
thing need not rest in the contradictory state, or if there is no
state of rest as a contrary to the process of change: it may be true
that the non-existent is not at rest, and that perishing is a process
to the non-existent. All that matters is the intervention of a time:
it is this that prevents the change from being continuous: so, too,
in our previous instances the important thing was not the relation
of contrariety but the impossibility of the two processes being present
to a thing at the same time. And there is no need to be disturbed
by the fact that on this showing there may be more than one contrary
to the same thing, that a particular motion will be contrary both
to rest and to motion in the contrary direction. We have only to grasp
the fact that a particular motion is in a sense the opposite both
of a state of rest and of the contrary motion, in the same way as
that which is of equal or standard measure is the opposite both of
that which surpasses it and of that which it surpasses, and that it
is impossible for the opposite motions or changes to be present to
a thing at the same time. Furthermore, in the case of becoming and
perishing it would seem to be an utterly absurd thing if as soon as
anything has become it must necessarily perish and cannot continue
to exist for any time: and, if this is true of becoming and perishing,
we have fair grounds for inferring the same to be true of the other
kinds of change, since it would be in the natural order of things
that they should be uniform in this respect. 

Part 8

Let us now proceed to maintain that it is possible that there should
be an infinite motion that is single and continuous, and that this
motion is rotatory motion. The motion of everything that is in process
of locomotion is either rotatory or rectilinear or a compound of the
two: consequently, if one of the former two is not continuous, that
which is composed of them both cannot be continuous either. Now it
is plain that if the locomotion of a thing is rectilinear and finite
it is not continuous locomotion: for the thing must turn back, and
that which turns back in a straight line undergoes two contrary locomotions,
since, so far as motion in respect of place is concerned, upward motion
is the contrary of downward motion, forward motion of backward motion,
and motion to the left of motion to the right, these being the pairs
of contraries in the sphere of place. But we have already defined
single and continuous motion to be motion of a single thing in a single
period of time and operating within a sphere admitting of no further
specific differentiation (for we have three things to consider, first
that which is in motion, e.g. a man or a god, secondly the 'when'
of the motion, that is to say, the time, and thirdly the sphere within
which it operates, which may be either place or affection or essential
form or magnitude): and contraries are specifically not one and the
same but distinct: and within the sphere of place we have the above-mentioned
distinctions. Moreover we have an indication that motion from A to
B is the contrary of motion from B to A in the fact that, if they
occur at the same time, they arrest and stop each other. And the same
is true in the case of a circle: the motion from A towards B is the
contrary of the motion from A towards G: for even if they are continuous
and there is no turning back they arrest each other, because contraries
annihilate or obstruct one another. On the other hand lateral motion
is not the contrary of upward motion. But what shows most clearly
that rectilinear motion cannot be continuous is the fact that turning
back necessarily implies coming to a stand, not only when it is a
straight line that is traversed, but also in the case of locomotion
in a circle (which is not the same thing as rotatory locomotion: for,
when a thing merely traverses a circle, it may either proceed on its
course without a break or turn back again when it has reached the
same point from which it started). We may assure ourselves of the
necessity of this coming to a stand not only on the strength of observation,
but also on theoretical grounds. We may start as follows: we have
three points, starting-point, middle-point, and finishing-point, of
which the middle-point in virtue of the relations in which it stands
severally to the other two is both a starting-point and a finishing-point,
and though numerically one is theoretically two. We have further the
distinction between the potential and the actual. So in the straight
line in question any one of the points lying between the two extremes
is potentially a middle-point: but it is not actually so unless that
which is in motion divides the line by coming to a stand at that point
and beginning its motion again: thus the middle-point becomes both
a starting-point and a goal, the starting-point of the latter part
and the finishing-point of the first part of the motion. This is the
case e.g. when A in the course of its locomotion comes to a stand
at B and starts again towards G: but when its motion is continuous
A cannot either have come to be or have ceased to be at the point
B: it can only have been there at the moment of passing, its passage
not being contained within any period of time except the whole of
which the particular moment is a dividing-point. To maintain that
it has come to be and ceased to be there will involve the consequence
that A in the course of its locomotion will always be coming to a
stand: for it is impossible that A should simultaneously have come
to be at B and ceased to be there, so that the two things must have
happened at different points of time, and therefore there will be
the intervening period of time: consequently A will be in a state
of rest at B, and similarly at all other points, since the same reasoning
holds good in every case. When to A, that which is in process of locomotion,
B, the middle-point, serves both as a finishing-point and as a starting-point
for its motion, A must come to a stand at B, because it makes it two
just as one might do in thought. However, the point A is the real
starting-point at which the moving body has ceased to be, and it is
at G that it has really come to be when its course is finished and
it comes to a stand. So this is how we must meet the difficulty that
then arises, which is as follows. Suppose the line E is equal to the
line Z, that A proceeds in continuous locomotion from the extreme
point of E to G, and that, at the moment when A is at the point B,
D is proceeding in uniform locomotion and with the same velocity as
A from the extremity of Z to H: then, says the argument, D will have
reached H before A has reached G for that which makes an earlier start
and departure must make an earlier arrival: the reason, then, for
the late arrival of A is that it has not simultaneously come to be
and ceased to be at B: otherwise it will not arrive later: for this
to happen it will be necessary that it should come to a stand there.
Therefore we must not hold that there was a moment when A came to
be at B and that at the same moment D was in motion from the extremity
of Z: for the fact of A's having come to be at B will involve the
fact of its also ceasing to be there, and the two events will not
be simultaneous, whereas the truth is that A is at B at a sectional
point of time and does not occupy time there. In this case, therefore,
where the motion of a thing is continuous, it is impossible to use
this form of expression. On the other hand in the case of a thing
that turns back in its course we must do so. For suppose H in the
course of its locomotion proceeds to D and then turns back and proceeds
downwards again: then the extreme point D has served as finishing-point
and as starting-point for it, one point thus serving as two: therefore
H must have come to a stand there: it cannot have come to be at D
and departed from D simultaneously, for in that case it would simultaneously
be there and not be there at the same moment. And here we cannot apply
the argument used to solve the difficulty stated above: we cannot
argue that H is at D at a sectional point of time and has not come
to be or ceased to be there. For here the goal that is reached is
necessarily one that is actually, not potentially, existent. Now the
point in the middle is potential: but this one is actual, and regarded
from below it is a finishing-point, while regarded from above it is
a starting-point, so that it stands in these same two respective relations
to the two motions. Therefore that which turns back in traversing
a rectilinear course must in so doing come to a stand. Consequently
there cannot be a continuous rectilinear motion that is eternal.

The same method should also be adopted in replying to those who ask,
in the terms of Zeno's argument, whether we admit that before any
distance can be traversed half the distance must be traversed, that
these half-distances are infinite in number, and that it is impossible
to traverse distances infinite in number-or some on the lines of this
same argument put the questions in another form, and would have us
grant that in the time during which a motion is in progress it should
be possible to reckon a half-motion before the whole for every half-distance
that we get, so that we have the result that when the whole distance
is traversed we have reckoned an infinite number, which is admittedly
impossible. Now when we first discussed the question of motion we
put forward a solution of this difficulty turning on the fact that
the period of time occupied in traversing the distance contains within
itself an infinite number of units: there is no absurdity, we said,
in supposing the traversing of infinite distances in infinite time,
and the element of infinity is present in the time no less than in
the distance. But, although this solution is adequate as a reply to
the questioner (the question asked being whether it is possible in
a finite time to traverse or reckon an infinite number of units),
nevertheless as an account of the fact and explanation of its true
nature it is inadequate. For suppose the distance to be left out of
account and the question asked to be no longer whether it is possible
in a finite time to traverse an infinite number of distances, and
suppose that the inquiry is made to refer to the time taken by itself
(for the time contains an infinite number of divisions): then this
solution will no longer be adequate, and we must apply the truth that
we enunciated in our recent discussion, stating it in the following
way. In the act of dividing the continuous distance into two halves
one point is treated as two, since we make it a starting-point and
a finishing-point: and this same result is also produced by the act
of reckoning halves as well as by the act of dividing into halves.
But if divisions are made in this way, neither the distance nor the
motion will be continuous: for motion if it is to be continuous must
relate to what is continuous: and though what is continuous contains
an infinite number of halves, they are not actual but potential halves.
If the halves are made actual, we shall get not a continuous but an
intermittent motion. In the case of reckoning the halves, it is clear
that this result follows: for then one point must be reckoned as two:
it will be the finishing-point of the one half and the starting-point
of the other, if we reckon not the one continuous whole but the two
halves. Therefore to the question whether it is possible to pass through
an infinite number of units either of time or of distance we must
reply that in a sense it is and in a sense it is not. If the units
are actual, it is not possible: if they are potential, it is possible.
For in the course of a continuous motion the traveller has traversed
an infinite number of units in an accidental sense but not in an unqualified
sense: for though it is an accidental characteristic of the distance
to be an infinite number of half-distances, this is not its real and
essential character. It is also plain that unless we hold that the
point of time that divides earlier from later always belongs only
to the later so far as the thing is concerned, we shall be involved
in the consequence that the same thing is at the same moment existent
and not existent, and that a thing is not existent at the moment when
it has become. It is true that the point is common to both times,
the earlier as well as the later, and that, while numerically one
and the same, it is theoretically not so, being the finishing-point
of the one and the starting-point of the other: but so far as the
thing is concerned it belongs to the later stage of what happens to
it. Let us suppose a time ABG and a thing D, D being white in the
time A and not-white in the time B. Then D is at the moment G white
and not-white: for if we were right in saying that it is white during
the whole time A, it is true to call it white at any moment of A,
and not-white in B, and G is in both A and B. We must not allow, therefore,
that it is white in the whole of A, but must say that it is so in
all of it except the last moment G. G belongs already to the later
period, and if in the whole of A not-white was in process of becoming
and white of perishing, at G the process is complete. And so G is
the first moment at which it is true to call the thing white or not
white respectively. Otherwise a thing may be non-existent at the moment
when it has become and existent at the moment when it has perished:
or else it must be possible for a thing at the same time to be white
and not white and in fact to be existent and non-existent. Further,
if anything that exists after having been previously non-existent
must become existent and does not exist when it is becoming, time
cannot be divisible into time-atoms. For suppose that D was becoming
white in the time A and that at another time B, a time-atom consecutive
with the last atom of A, D has already become white and so is white
at that moment: then, inasmuch as in the time A it was becoming white
and so was not white and at the moment B it is white, there must have
been a becoming between A and B and therefore also a time in which
the becoming took place. On the other hand, those who deny atoms of
time (as we do) are not affected by this argument: according to them
D has become and so is white at the last point of the actual time
in which it was becoming white: and this point has no other point
consecutive with or in succession to it, whereas time-atoms are conceived
as successive. Moreover it is clear that if D was becoming white in
the whole time A, the time occupied by it in having become white in
addition to having been in process of becoming white is no more than
all that it occupied in the mere process of becoming white.

These and such-like, then, are the arguments for our conclusion that
derive cogency from the fact that they have a special bearing on the
point at issue. If we look at the question from the point of view
of general theory, the same result would also appear to be indicated
by the following arguments. Everything whose motion is continuous
must, on arriving at any point in the course of its locomotion, have
been previously also in process of locomotion to that point, if it
is not forced out of its path by anything: e.g. on arriving at B a
thing must also have been in process of locomotion to B, and that
not merely when it was near to B, but from the moment of its starting
on its course, since there can be, no reason for its being so at any
particular stage rather than at an earlier one. So, too, in the case
of the other kinds of motion. Now we are to suppose that a thing proceeds
in locomotion from A to G and that at the moment of its arrival at
G the continuity of its motion is unbroken and will remain so until
it has arrived back at A. Then when it is undergoing locomotion from
A to G it is at the same time undergoing also its locomotion to A
from G: consequently it is simultaneously undergoing two contrary
motions, since the two motions that follow the same straight line
are contrary to each other. With this consequence there also follows
another: we have a thing that is in process of change from a position
in which it has not yet been: so, inasmuch as this is impossible,
the thing must come to a stand at G. Therefore the motion is not a
single motion, since motion that is interrupted by stationariness
is not single. 

Further, the following argument will serve better to make this point
clear universally in respect of every kind of motion. If the motion
undergone by that which is in motion is always one of those already
enumerated, and the state of rest that it undergoes is one of those
that are the opposites of the motions (for we found that there could
be no other besides these), and moreover that which is undergoing
but does not always undergo a particular motion (by this I mean one
of the various specifically distinct motions, not some particular
part of the whole motion) must have been previously undergoing the
state of rest that is the opposite of the motion, the state of rest
being privation of motion; then, inasmuch as the two motions that
follow the same straight line are contrary motions, and it is impossible
for a thing to undergo simultaneously two contrary motions, that which
is undergoing locomotion from A to G cannot also simultaneously be
undergoing locomotion from G to A: and since the latter locomotion
is not simultaneous with the former but is still to be undergone,
before it is undergone there must occur a state of rest at G: for
this, as we found, is the state of rest that is the opposite of the
motion from G. The foregoing argument, then, makes it plain that the
motion in question is not continuous. 

Our next argument has a more special bearing than the foregoing on
the point at issue. We will suppose that there has occurred in something
simultaneously a perishing of not-white and a becoming of white. Then
if the alteration to white and from white is a continuous process
and the white does not remain any time, there must have occurred simultaneously
a perishing of not-white, a becoming of white, and a becoming of not-white:
for the time of the three will be the same. 

Again, from the continuity of the time in which the motion takes place
we cannot infer continuity in the motion, but only successiveness:
in fact, how could contraries, e.g. whiteness and blackness, meet
in the same extreme point? 

On the other hand, in motion on a circular line we shall find singleness
and continuity: for here we are met by no impossible consequence:
that which is in motion from A will in virtue of the same direction
of energy be simultaneously in motion to A (since it is in motion
to the point at which it will finally arrive), and yet will not be
undergoing two contrary or opposite motions: for a motion to a point
and a motion from that point are not always contraries or opposites:
they are contraries only if they are on the same straight line (for
then they are contrary to one another in respect of place, as e.g.
the two motions along the diameter of the circle, since the ends of
this are at the greatest possible distance from one another), and
they are opposites only if they are along the same line. Therefore
in the case we are now considering there is nothing to prevent the
motion being continuous and free from all intermission: for rotatory
motion is motion of a thing from its place to its place, whereas rectilinear
motion is motion from its place to another place. 

Moreover the progress of rotatory motion is never localized within
certain fixed limits, whereas that of rectilinear motion repeatedly
is so. Now a motion that is always shifting its ground from moment
to moment can be continuous: but a motion that is repeatedly localized
within certain fixed limits cannot be so, since then the same thing
would have to undergo simultaneously two opposite motions. So, too,
there cannot be continuous motion in a semicircle or in any other
arc of a circle, since here also the same ground must be traversed
repeatedly and two contrary processes of change must occur. The reason
is that in these motions the starting-point and the termination do
not coincide, whereas in motion over a circle they do coincide, and
so this is the only perfect motion. 

This differentiation also provides another means of showing that the
other kinds of motion cannot be continuous either: for in all of them
we find that there is the same ground to be traversed repeatedly;
thus in alteration there are the intermediate stages of the process,
and in quantitative change there are the intervening degrees of magnitude:
and in becoming and perishing the same thing is true. It makes no
difference whether we take the intermediate stages of the process
to be few or many, or whether we add or subtract one: for in either
case we find that there is still the same ground to be traversed repeatedly.
Moreover it is plain from what has been said that those physicists
who assert that all sensible things are always in motion are wrong:
for their motion must be one or other of the motions just mentioned:
in fact they mostly conceive it as alteration (things are always in
flux and decay, they say), and they go so far as to speak even of
becoming and perishing as a process of alteration. On the other hand,
our argument has enabled us to assert the fact, applying universally
to all motions, that no motion admits of continuity except rotatory
motion: consequently neither alteration nor increase admits of continuity.
We need now say no more in support of the position that there is no
process of change that admits of infinity or continuity except rotatory
locomotion. 

Part 9

It can now be shown plainly that rotation is the primary locomotion.
Every locomotion, as we said before, is either rotatory or rectilinear
or a compound of the two: and the two former must be prior to the
last, since they are the elements of which the latter consists. Moreover
rotatory locomotion is prior to rectilinear locomotion, because it
is more simple and complete, which may be shown as follows. The straight
line traversed in rectilinear motion cannot be infinite: for there
is no such thing as an infinite straight line; and even if there were,
it would not be traversed by anything in motion: for the impossible
does not happen and it is impossible to traverse an infinite distance.
On the other hand rectilinear motion on a finite straight line is
if it turns back a composite motion, in fact two motions, while if
it does not turn back it is incomplete and perishable: and in the
order of nature, of definition, and of time alike the complete is
prior to the incomplete and the imperishable to the perishable. Again,
a motion that admits of being eternal is prior to one that does not.
Now rotatory motion can be eternal: but no other motion, whether locomotion
or motion of any other kind, can be so, since in all of them rest
must occur and with the occurrence of rest the motion has perished.
Moreover the result at which we have arrived, that rotatory motion
is single and continuous, and rectilinear motion is not, is a reasonable
one. In rectilinear motion we have a definite starting-point, finishing-point,
middle-point, which all have their place in it in such a way that
there is a point from which that which is in motion can be said to
start and a point at which it can be said to finish its course (for
when anything is at the limits of its course, whether at the starting-point
or at the finishing-point, it must be in a state of rest). On the
other hand in circular motion there are no such definite points: for
why should any one point on the line be a limit rather than any other?
Any one point as much as any other is alike starting-point, middle-point,
and finishing-point, so that we can say of certain things both that
they are always and that they never are at a starting-point and at
a finishing-point (so that a revolving sphere, while it is in motion,
is also in a sense at rest, for it continues to occupy the same place).
The reason of this is that in this case all these characteristics
belong to the centre: that is to say, the centre is alike starting-point,
middle-point, and finishing-point of the space traversed; consequently
since this point is not a point on the circular line, there is no
point at which that which is in process of locomotion can be in a
state of rest as having traversed its course, because in its locomotion
it is proceeding always about a central point and not to an extreme
point: therefore it remains still, and the whole is in a sense always
at rest as well as continuously in motion. Our next point gives a
convertible result: on the one hand, because rotation is the measure
of motions it must be the primary motion (for all things are measured
by what is primary): on the other hand, because rotation is the primary
motion it is the measure of all other motions. Again, rotatory motion
is also the only motion that admits of being regular. In rectilinear
locomotion the motion of things in leaving the starting-point is not
uniform with their motion in approaching the finishing-point, since
the velocity of a thing always increases proportionately as it removes
itself farther from its position of rest: on the other hand rotatory
motion is the only motion whose course is naturally such that it has
no starting-point or finishing-point in itself but is determined from
elsewhere. 

As to locomotion being the primary motion, this is a truth that is
attested by all who have ever made mention of motion in their theories:
they all assign their first principles of motion to things that impart
motion of this kind. Thus 'separation' and 'combination' are motions
in respect of place, and the motion imparted by 'Love' and 'Strife'
takes these forms, the latter 'separating' and the former 'combining'.
Anaxagoras, too, says that 'Mind', his first movent, 'separates'.
Similarly those who assert no cause of this kind but say that 'void'
accounts for motion-they also hold that the motion of natural substance
is motion in respect of place: for their motion that is accounted
for by 'void' is locomotion, and its sphere of operation may be said
to be place. Moreover they are of opinion that the primary substances
are not subject to any of the other motions, though the things that
are compounds of these substances are so subject: the processes of
increase and decrease and alteration, they say, are effects of the
'combination' and 'separation' of atoms. It is the same, too, with
those who make out that the becoming or perishing of a thing is accounted
for by 'density' or 'rarity': for it is by 'combination' and 'separation'
that the place of these things in their systems is determined. Moreover
to these we may add those who make Soul the cause of motion: for they
say that things that undergo motion have as their first principle
'that which moves itself': and when animals and all living things
move themselves, the motion is motion in respect of place. Finally
it is to be noted that we say that a thing 'is in motion' in the strict
sense of the term only when its motion is motion in respect of place:
if a thing is in process of increase or decrease or is undergoing
some alteration while remaining at rest in the same place, we say
that it is in motion in some particular respect: we do not say that
it 'is in motion' without qualification. 

Our present position, then, is this: We have argued that there always
was motion and always will be motion throughout all time, and we have
explained what is the first principle of this eternal motion: we have
explained further which is the primary motion and which is the only
motion that can be eternal: and we have pronounced the first movent
to be unmoved. 

Part 10

We have now to assert that the first movent must be without parts
and without magnitude, beginning with the establishment of the premisses
on which this conclusion depends. 

One of these premisses is that nothing finite can cause motion during
an infinite time. We have three things, the movent, the moved, and
thirdly that in which the motion takes place, namely the time: and
these are either all infinite or all finite or partly-that is to say
two of them or one of them-finite and partly infinite. Let A be the
movement, B the moved, and G the infinite time. Now let us suppose
that D moves E, a part of B. Then the time occupied by this motion
cannot be equal to G: for the greater the amount moved, the longer
the time occupied. It follows that the time Z is not infinite. Now
we see that by continuing to add to D, I shall use up A and by continuing
to add to E, I shall use up B: but I shall not use up the time by
continually subtracting a corresponding amount from it, because it
is infinite. Consequently the duration of the part of G which is occupied
by all A in moving the whole of B, will be finite. Therefore a finite
thing cannot impart to anything an infinite motion. It is clear, then,
that it is impossible for the finite to cause motion during an infinite
time. 

It has now to be shown that in no case is it possible for an infinite
force to reside in a finite magnitude. This can be shown as follows:
we take it for granted that the greater force is always that which
in less time than another does an equal amount of work when engaged
in any activity-in heating, for example, or sweetening or throwing;
in fact, in causing any kind of motion. Then that on which the forces
act must be affected to some extent by our supposed finite magnitude
possessing an infinite force as well as by anything else, in fact
to a greater extent than by anything else, since the infinite force
is greater than any other. But then there cannot be any time in which
its action could take place. Suppose that A is the time occupied by
the infinite power in the performance of an act of heating or pushing,
and that AB is the time occupied by a finite power in the performance
of the same act: then by adding to the latter another finite power
and continually increasing the magnitude of the power so added I shall
at some time or other reach a point at which the finite power has
completed the motive act in the time A: for by continual addition
to a finite magnitude I must arrive at a magnitude that exceeds any
assigned limit, and in the same way by continual subtraction I must
arrive at one that falls short of any assigned limit. So we get the
result that the finite force will occupy the same amount of time in
performing the motive act as the infinite force. But this is impossible.
Therefore nothing finite can possess an infinite force. So it is also
impossible for a finite force to reside in an infinite magnitude.
It is true that a greater force can reside in a lesser magnitude:
but the superiority of any such greater force can be still greater
if the magnitude in which it resides is greater. Now let AB be an
infinite magnitude. Then BG possesses a certain force that occupies
a certain time, let us say the time Z in moving D. Now if I take a
magnitude twice as great at BG, the time occupied by this magnitude
in moving D will be half of EZ (assuming this to be the proportion):
so we may call this time ZH. That being so, by continually taking
a greater magnitude in this way I shall never arrive at the full AB,
whereas I shall always be getting a lesser fraction of the time given.
Therefore the force must be infinite, since it exceeds any finite
force. Moreover the time occupied by the action of any finite force
must also be finite: for if a given force moves something in a certain
time, a greater force will do so in a lesser time, but still a definite
time, in inverse proportion. But a force must always be infinite-just
as a number or a magnitude is-if it exceeds all definite limits. This
point may also be proved in another way-by taking a finite magnitude
in which there resides a force the same in kind as that which resides
in the infinite magnitude, so that this force will be a measure of
the finite force residing in the infinite magnitude. 

It is plain, then, from the foregoing arguments that it is impossible
for an infinite force to reside in a finite magnitude or for a finite
force to reside in an infinite magnitude. But before proceeding to
our conclusion it will be well to discuss a difficulty that arises
in connexion with locomotion. If everything that is in motion with
the exception of things that move themselves is moved by something
else, how is it that some things, e.g. things thrown, continue to
be in motion when their movent is no longer in contact with them?
If we say that the movent in such cases moves something else at the
same time, that the thrower e.g. also moves the air, and that this
in being moved is also a movent, then it would be no more possible
for this second thing than for the original thing to be in motion
when the original movent is not in contact with it or moving it: all
the things moved would have to be in motion simultaneously and also
to have ceased simultaneously to be in motion when the original movent
ceases to move them, even if, like the magnet, it makes that which
it has moved capable of being a movent. Therefore, while we must accept
this explanation to the extent of saying that the original movent
gives the power of being a movent either to air or to water or to
something else of the kind, naturally adapted for imparting and undergoing
motion, we must say further that this thing does not cease simultaneously
to impart motion and to undergo motion: it ceases to be in motion
at the moment when its movent ceases to move it, but it still remains
a movent, and so it causes something else consecutive with it to be
in motion, and of this again the same may be said. The motion begins
to cease when the motive force produced in one member of the consecutive
series is at each stage less than that possessed by the preceding
member, and it finally ceases when one member no longer causes the
next member to be a movent but only causes it to be in motion. The
motion of these last two-of the one as movent and of the other as
moved-must cease simultaneously, and with this the whole motion ceases.
Now the things in which this motion is produced are things that admit
of being sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest, and the motion
is not continuous but only appears so: for it is motion of things
that are either successive or in contact, there being not one movent
but a number of movents consecutive with one another: and so motion
of this kind takes place in air and water. Some say that it is 'mutual
replacement': but we must recognize that the difficulty raised cannot
be solved otherwise than in the way we have described. So far as they
are affected by 'mutual replacement', all the members of the series
are moved and impart motion simultaneously, so that their motions
also cease simultaneously: but our present problem concerns the appearance
of continuous motion in a single thing, and therefore, since it cannot
be moved throughout its motion by the same movent, the question is,
what moves it? 

Resuming our main argument, we proceed from the positions that there
must be continuous motion in the world of things, that this is a single
motion, that a single motion must be a motion of a magnitude (for
that which is without magnitude cannot be in motion), and that the
magnitude must be a single magnitude moved by a single movent (for
otherwise there will not be continuous motion but a consecutive series
of separate motions), and that if the movement is a single thing,
it is either itself in motion or itself unmoved: if, then, it is in
motion, it will have to be subject to the same conditions as that
which it moves, that is to say it will itself be in process of change
and in being so will also have to be moved by something: so we have
a series that must come to an end, and a point will be reached at
which motion is imparted by something that is unmoved. Thus we have
a movent that has no need to change along with that which it moves
but will be able to cause motion always (for the causing of motion
under these conditions involves no effort): and this motion alone
is regular, or at least it is so in a higher degree than any other,
since the movent is never subject to any change. So, too, in order
that the motion may continue to be of the same character, the moved
must not be subject to change in respect of its relation to the movent.
Moreover the movent must occupy either the centre or the circumference,
since these are the first principles from which a sphere is derived.
But the things nearest the movent are those whose motion is quickest,
and in this case it is the motion of the circumference that is the
quickest: therefore the movent occupies the circumference.

There is a further difficulty in supposing it to be possible for anything
that is in motion to cause motion continuously and not merely in the
way in which it is caused by something repeatedly pushing (in which
case the continuity amounts to no more than successiveness). Such
a movent must either itself continue to push or pull or perform both
these actions, or else the action must be taken up by something else
and be passed on from one movent to another (the process that we described
before as occurring in the case of things thrown, since the air or
the water, being divisible, is a movent only in virtue of the fact
that different parts of the air are moved one after another): and
in either case the motion cannot be a single motion, but only a consecutive
series of motions. The only continuous motion, then, is that which
is caused by the unmoved movent: and this motion is continuous because
the movent remains always invariable, so that its relation to that
which it moves remains also invariable and continuous. 

Now that these points are settled, it is clear that the first unmoved
movent cannot have any magnitude. For if it has magnitude, this must
be either a finite or an infinite magnitude. Now we have already'proved
in our course on Physics that there cannot be an infinite magnitude:
and we have now proved that it is impossible for a finite magnitude
to have an infinite force, and also that it is impossible for a thing
to be moved by a finite magnitude during an infinite time. But the
first movent causes a motion that is eternal and does cause it during
an infinite time. It is clear, therefore, that the first movent is
indivisible and is without parts and without magnitude. 

THE END

BOOK ONE

Part I 

Every tate is a community of some kind, and every community is established
with a view to some good; for mankind always act in order to obtain
that which they think good. But, if all communities aim at some good,
the state or political community, which is the highest of all, and
which embraces all the rest, aims at good in a greater degree than
any other, and at the highest good. 

Some people think that the qualifications of a statesman, king, householder,
and master are the same, and that they differ, not in kind, but only
in the number of their subjects. For example, the ruler over a few
is called a master; over more, the manager of a household; over a
still larger number, a statesman or king, as if there were no difference
between a great household and a small state. The distinction which
is made between the king and the statesman is as follows: When the
government is personal, the ruler is a king; when, according to the
rules of the political science, the citizens rule and are ruled in
turn, then he is called a statesman. 

But all this is a mistake; for governments differ in kind, as will
be evident to any one who considers the matter according to the method
which has hitherto guided us. As in other departments of science,
so in politics, the compound should always be resolved into the simple
elements or least parts of the whole. We must therefore look at the
elements of which the state is composed, in order that we may see
in what the different kinds of rule differ from one another, and whether
any scientific result can be attained about each one of them.

Part II

He who thus considers things in their first growth and origin, whether
a state or anything else, will obtain the clearest view of them. In
the first place there must be a union of those who cannot exist without
each other; namely, of male and female, that the race may continue
(and this is a union which is formed, not of deliberate purpose, but
because, in common with other animals and with plants, mankind have
a natural desire to leave behind them an image of themselves), and
of natural ruler and subject, that both may be preserved. For that
which can foresee by the exercise of mind is by nature intended to
be lord and master, and that which can with its body give effect to
such foresight is a subject, and by nature a slave; hence master and
slave have the same interest. Now nature has distinguished between
the female and the slave. For she is not niggardly, like the smith
who fashions the Delphian knife for many uses; she makes each thing
for a single use, and every instrument is best made when intended
for one and not for many uses. But among barbarians no distinction
is made between women and slaves, because there is no natural ruler
among them: they are a community of slaves, male and female. Wherefore
the poets say, 

"It is meet that Hellenes should rule over barbarians; "

as if they thought that the barbarian and the slave were by nature
one. 

Out of these two relationships between man and woman, master and slave,
the first thing to arise is the family, and Hesiod is right when he
says, 

"First house and wife and an ox for the plough, "

for the ox is the poor man's slave. The family is the association
established by nature for the supply of men's everyday wants, and
the members of it are called by Charondas 'companions of the cupboard,'
and by Epimenides the Cretan, 'companions of the manger.' But when
several families are united, and the association aims at something
more than the supply of daily needs, the first society to be formed
is the village. And the most natural form of the village appears to
be that of a colony from the family, composed of the children and
grandchildren, who are said to be suckled 'with the same milk.' And
this is the reason why Hellenic states were originally governed by
kings; because the Hellenes were under royal rule before they came
together, as the barbarians still are. Every family is ruled by the
eldest, and therefore in the colonies of the family the kingly form
of government prevailed because they were of the same blood. As Homer
says: 

"Each one gives law to his children and to his wives. "

For they lived dispersedly, as was the manner in ancient times. Wherefore
men say that the Gods have a king, because they themselves either
are or were in ancient times under the rule of a king. For they imagine,
not only the forms of the Gods, but their ways of life to be like
their own. 

When several villages are united in a single complete community, large
enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing, the state comes into
existence, originating in the bare needs of life, and continuing in
existence for the sake of a good life. And therefore, if the earlier
forms of society are natural, so is the state, for it is the end of
them, and the nature of a thing is its end. For what each thing is
when fully developed, we call its nature, whether we are speaking
of a man, a horse, or a family. Besides, the final cause and end of
a thing is the best, and to be self-sufficing is the end and the best.

Hence it is evident that the state is a creation of nature, and that
man is by nature a political animal. And he who by nature and not
by mere accident is without a state, is either a bad man or above
humanity; he is like the 

"Tribeless, lawless, hearthless one, "

whom Homer denounces- the natural outcast is forthwith a lover of
war; he may be compared to an isolated piece at draughts.

Now, that man is more of a political animal than bees or any other
gregarious animals is evident. Nature, as we often say, makes nothing
in vain, and man is the only animal whom she has endowed with the
gift of speech. And whereas mere voice is but an indication of pleasure
or pain, and is therefore found in other animals (for their nature
attains to the perception of pleasure and pain and the intimation
of them to one another, and no further), the power of speech is intended
to set forth the expedient and inexpedient, and therefore likewise
the just and the unjust. And it is a characteristic of man that he
alone has any sense of good and evil, of just and unjust, and the
like, and the association of living beings who have this sense makes
a family and a state. 

Further, the state is by nature clearly prior to the family and to
the individual, since the whole is of necessity prior to the part;
for example, if the whole body be destroyed, there will be no foot
or hand, except in an equivocal sense, as we might speak of a stone
hand; for when destroyed the hand will be no better than that. But
things are defined by their working and power; and we ought not to
say that they are the same when they no longer have their proper quality,
but only that they have the same name. The proof that the state is
a creation of nature and prior to the individual is that the individual,
when isolated, is not self-sufficing; and therefore he is like a part
in relation to the whole. But he who is unable to live in society,
or who has no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either
a beast or a god: he is no part of a state. A social instinct is implanted
in all men by nature, and yet he who first founded the state was the
greatest of benefactors. For man, when perfected, is the best of animals,
but, when separated from law and justice, he is the worst of all;
since armed injustice is the more dangerous, and he is equipped at
birth with arms, meant to be used by intelligence and virtue, which
he may use for the worst ends. Wherefore, if he have not virtue, he
is the most unholy and the most savage of animals, and the most full
of lust and gluttony. But justice is the bond of men in states, for
the administration of justice, which is the determination of what
is just, is the principle of order in political society.

Part III

Seeing then that the state is made up of households, before speaking
of the state we must speak of the management of the household. The
parts of household management correspond to the persons who compose
the household, and a complete household consists of slaves and freemen.
Now we should begin by examining everything in its fewest possible
elements; and the first and fewest possible parts of a family are
master and slave, husband and wife, father and children. We have therefore
to consider what each of these three relations is and ought to be:
I mean the relation of master and servant, the marriage relation (the
conjunction of man and wife has no name of its own), and thirdly,
the procreative relation (this also has no proper name). And there
is another element of a household, the so-called art of getting wealth,
which, according to some, is identical with household management,
according to others, a principal part of it; the nature of this art
will also have to be considered by us. 

Let us first speak of master and slave, looking to the needs of practical
life and also seeking to attain some better theory of their relation
than exists at present. For some are of opinion that the rule of a
master is a science, and that the management of a household, and the
mastership of slaves, and the political and royal rule, as I was saying
at the outset, are all the same. Others affirm that the rule of a
master over slaves is contrary to nature, and that the distinction
between slave and freeman exists by law only, and not by nature; and
being an interference with nature is therefore unjust. 

Part IV

Property is a part of the household, and the art of acquiring property
is a part of the art of managing the household; for no man can live
well, or indeed live at all, unless he be provided with necessaries.
And as in the arts which have a definite sphere the workers must have
their own proper instruments for the accomplishment of their work,
so it is in the management of a household. Now instruments are of
various sorts; some are living, others lifeless; in the rudder, the
pilot of a ship has a lifeless, in the look-out man, a living instrument;
for in the arts the servant is a kind of instrument. Thus, too, a
possession is an instrument for maintaining life. And so, in the arrangement
of the family, a slave is a living possession, and property a number
of such instruments; and the servant is himself an instrument which
takes precedence of all other instruments. For if every instrument
could accomplish its own work, obeying or anticipating the will of
others, like the statues of Daedalus, or the tripods of Hephaestus,
which, says the poet, 

"of their own accord entered the assembly of the Gods; "

if, in like manner, the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch
the lyre without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not want
servants, nor masters slaves. Here, however, another distinction must
be drawn; the instruments commonly so called are instruments of production,
whilst a possession is an instrument of action. The shuttle, for example,
is not only of use; but something else is made by it, whereas of a
garment or of a bed there is only the use. Further, as production
and action are different in kind, and both require instruments, the
instruments which they employ must likewise differ in kind. But life
is action and not production, and therefore the slave is the minister
of action. Again, a possession is spoken of as a part is spoken of;
for the part is not only a part of something else, but wholly belongs
to it; and this is also true of a possession. The master is only the
master of the slave; he does not belong to him, whereas the slave
is not only the slave of his master, but wholly belongs to him. Hence
we see what is the nature and office of a slave; he who is by nature
not his own but another's man, is by nature a slave; and he may be
said to be another's man who, being a human being, is also a possession.
And a possession may be defined as an instrument of action, separable
from the possessor. 

Part V

But is there any one thus intended by nature to be a slave, and for
whom such a condition is expedient and right, or rather is not all
slavery a violation of nature? 

There is no difficulty in answering this question, on grounds both
of reason and of fact. For that some should rule and others be ruled
is a thing not only necessary, but expedient; from the hour of their
birth, some are marked out for subjection, others for rule.

And there are many kinds both of rulers and subjects (and that rule
is the better which is exercised over better subjects- for example,
to rule over men is better than to rule over wild beasts; for the
work is better which is executed by better workmen, and where one
man rules and another is ruled, they may be said to have a work);
for in all things which form a composite whole and which are made
up of parts, whether continuous or discrete, a distinction between
the ruling and the subject element comes to fight. Such a duality
exists in living creatures, but not in them only; it originates in
the constitution of the universe; even in things which have no life
there is a ruling principle, as in a musical mode. But we are wandering
from the subject. We will therefore restrict ourselves to the living
creature, which, in the first place, consists of soul and body: and
of these two, the one is by nature the ruler, and the other the subject.
But then we must look for the intentions of nature in things which
retain their nature, and not in things which are corrupted. And therefore
we must study the man who is in the most perfect state both of body
and soul, for in him we shall see the true relation of the two; although
in bad or corrupted natures the body will often appear to rule over
the soul, because they are in an evil and unnatural condition. At
all events we may firstly observe in living creatures both a despotical
and a constitutional rule; for the soul rules the body with a despotical
rule, whereas the intellect rules the appetites with a constitutional
and royal rule. And it is clear that the rule of the soul over the
body, and of the mind and the rational element over the passionate,
is natural and expedient; whereas the equality of the two or the rule
of the inferior is always hurtful. The same holds good of animals
in relation to men; for tame animals have a better nature than wild,
and all tame animals are better off when they are ruled by man; for
then they are preserved. Again, the male is by nature superior, and
the female inferior; and the one rules, and the other is ruled; this
principle, of necessity, extends to all mankind. 

Where then there is such a difference as that between soul and body,
or between men and animals (as in the case of those whose business
is to use their body, and who can do nothing better), the lower sort
are by nature slaves, and it is better for them as for all inferiors
that they should be under the rule of a master. For he who can be,
and therefore is, another's and he who participates in rational principle
enough to apprehend, but not to have, such a principle, is a slave
by nature. Whereas the lower animals cannot even apprehend a principle;
they obey their instincts. And indeed the use made of slaves and of
tame animals is not very different; for both with their bodies minister
to the needs of life. Nature would like to distinguish between the
bodies of freemen and slaves, making the one strong for servile labor,
the other upright, and although useless for such services, useful
for political life in the arts both of war and peace. But the opposite
often happens- that some have the souls and others have the bodies
of freemen. And doubtless if men differed from one another in the
mere forms of their bodies as much as the statues of the Gods do from
men, all would acknowledge that the inferior class should be slaves
of the superior. And if this is true of the body, how much more just
that a similar distinction should exist in the soul? but the beauty
of the body is seen, whereas the beauty of the soul is not seen. It
is clear, then, that some men are by nature free, and others slaves,
and that for these latter slavery is both expedient and right.

Part VI

But that those who take the opposite view have in a certain way right
on their side, may be easily seen. For the words slavery and slave
are used in two senses. There is a slave or slavery by law as well
as by nature. The law of which I speak is a sort of convention- the
law by which whatever is taken in war is supposed to belong to the
victors. But this right many jurists impeach, as they would an orator
who brought forward an unconstitutional measure: they detest the notion
that, because one man has the power of doing violence and is superior
in brute strength, another shall be his slave and subject. Even among
philosophers there is a difference of opinion. The origin of the dispute,
and what makes the views invade each other's territory, is as follows:
in some sense virtue, when furnished with means, has actually the
greatest power of exercising force; and as superior power is only
found where there is superior excellence of some kind, power seems
to imply virtue, and the dispute to be simply one about justice (for
it is due to one party identifying justice with goodwill while the
other identifies it with the mere rule of the stronger). If these
views are thus set out separately, the other views have no force or
plausibility against the view that the superior in virtue ought to
rule, or be master. Others, clinging, as they think, simply to a principle
of justice (for law and custom are a sort of justice), assume that
slavery in accordance with the custom of war is justified by law,
but at the same moment they deny this. For what if the cause of the
war be unjust? And again, no one would ever say he is a slave who
is unworthy to be a slave. Were this the case, men of the highest
rank would be slaves and the children of slaves if they or their parents
chance to have been taken captive and sold. Wherefore Hellenes do
not like to call Hellenes slaves, but confine the term to barbarians.
Yet, in using this language, they really mean the natural slave of
whom we spoke at first; for it must be admitted that some are slaves
everywhere, others nowhere. The same principle applies to nobility.
Hellenes regard themselves as noble everywhere, and not only in their
own country, but they deem the barbarians noble only when at home,
thereby implying that there are two sorts of nobility and freedom,
the one absolute, the other relative. The Helen of Theodectes says:

"Who would presume to call me servant who am on both sides sprung
from the stem of the Gods? "

What does this mean but that they distinguish freedom and slavery,
noble and humble birth, by the two principles of good and evil? They
think that as men and animals beget men and animals, so from good
men a good man springs. But this is what nature, though she may intend
it, cannot always accomplish. 

We see then that there is some foundation for this difference of opinion,
and that all are not either slaves by nature or freemen by nature,
and also that there is in some cases a marked distinction between
the two classes, rendering it expedient and right for the one to be
slaves and the others to be masters: the one practicing obedience,
the others exercising the authority and lordship which nature intended
them to have. The abuse of this authority is injurious to both; for
the interests of part and whole, of body and soul, are the same, and
the slave is a part of the master, a living but separated part of
his bodily frame. Hence, where the relation of master and slave between
them is natural they are friends and have a common interest, but where
it rests merely on law and force the reverse is true. 

Part VII

The previous remarks are quite enough to show that the rule of a master
is not a constitutional rule, and that all the different kinds of
rule are not, as some affirm, the same with each other. For there
is one rule exercised over subjects who are by nature free, another
over subjects who are by nature slaves. The rule of a household is
a monarchy, for every house is under one head: whereas constitutional
rule is a government of freemen and equals. The master is not called
a master because he has science, but because he is of a certain character,
and the same remark applies to the slave and the freeman. Still there
may be a science for the master and science for the slave. The science
of the slave would be such as the man of Syracuse taught, who made
money by instructing slaves in their ordinary duties. And such a knowledge
may be carried further, so as to include cookery and similar menial
arts. For some duties are of the more necessary, others of the more
honorable sort; as the proverb says, 'slave before slave, master before
master.' But all such branches of knowledge are servile. There is
likewise a science of the master, which teaches the use of slaves;
for the master as such is concerned, not with the acquisition, but
with the use of them. Yet this so-called science is not anything great
or wonderful; for the master need only know how to order that which
the slave must know how to execute. Hence those who are in a position
which places them above toil have stewards who attend to their households
while they occupy themselves with philosophy or with politics. But
the art of acquiring slaves, I mean of justly acquiring them, differs
both from the art of the master and the art of the slave, being a
species of hunting or war. Enough of the distinction between master
and slave. 

Part VIII

Let us now inquire into property generally, and into the art of getting
wealth, in accordance with our usual method, for a slave has been
shown to be a part of property. The first question is whether the
art of getting wealth is the same with the art of managing a household
or a part of it, or instrumental to it; and if the last, whether in
the way that the art of making shuttles is instrumental to the art
of weaving, or in the way that the casting of bronze is instrumental
to the art of the statuary, for they are not instrumental in the same
way, but the one provides tools and the other material; and by material
I mean the substratum out of which any work is made; thus wool is
the material of the weaver, bronze of the statuary. Now it is easy
to see that the art of household management is not identical with
the art of getting wealth, for the one uses the material which the
other provides. For the art which uses household stores can be no
other than the art of household management. There is, however, a doubt
whether the art of getting wealth is a part of household management
or a distinct art. If the getter of wealth has to consider whence
wealth and property can be procured, but there are many sorts of property
and riches, then are husbandry, and the care and provision of food
in general, parts of the wealth-getting art or distinct arts? Again,
there are many sorts of food, and therefore there are many kinds of
lives both of animals and men; they must all have food, and the differences
in their food have made differences in their ways of life. For of
beasts, some are gregarious, others are solitary; they live in the
way which is best adapted to sustain them, accordingly as they are
carnivorous or herbivorous or omnivorous: and their habits are determined
for them by nature in such a manner that they may obtain with greater
facility the food of their choice. But, as different species have
different tastes, the same things are not naturally pleasant to all
of them; and therefore the lives of carnivorous or herbivorous animals
further differ among themselves. In the lives of men too there is
a great difference. The laziest are shepherds, who lead an idle life,
and get their subsistence without trouble from tame animals; their
flocks having to wander from place to place in search of pasture,
they are compelled to follow them, cultivating a sort of living farm.
Others support themselves by hunting, which is of different kinds.
Some, for example, are brigands, others, who dwell near lakes or marshes
or rivers or a sea in which there are fish, are fishermen, and others
live by the pursuit of birds or wild beasts. The greater number obtain
a living from the cultivated fruits of the soil. Such are the modes
of subsistence which prevail among those whose industry springs up
of itself, and whose food is not acquired by exchange and retail trade-
there is the shepherd, the husbandman, the brigand, the fisherman,
the hunter. Some gain a comfortable maintenance out of two employments,
eking out the deficiencies of one of them by another: thus the life
of a shepherd may be combined with that of a brigand, the life of
a farmer with that of a hunter. Other modes of life are similarly
combined in any way which the needs of men may require. Property,
in the sense of a bare livelihood, seems to be given by nature herself
to all, both when they are first born, and when they are grown up.
For some animals bring forth, together with their offspring, so much
food as will last until they are able to supply themselves; of this
the vermiparous or oviparous animals are an instance; and the viviparous
animals have up to a certain time a supply of food for their young
in themselves, which is called milk. In like manner we may infer that,
after the birth of animals, plants exist for their sake, and that
the other animals exist for the sake of man, the tame for use and
food, the wild, if not all at least the greater part of them, for
food, and for the provision of clothing and various instruments. Now
if nature makes nothing incomplete, and nothing in vain, the inference
must be that she has made all animals for the sake of man. And so,
in one point of view, the art of war is a natural art of acquisition,
for the art of acquisition includes hunting, an art which we ought
to practice against wild beasts, and against men who, though intended
by nature to be governed, will not submit; for war of such a kind
is naturally just. 

Of the art of acquisition then there is one kind which by nature is
a part of the management of a household, in so far as the art of household
management must either find ready to hand, or itself provide, such
things necessary to life, and useful for the community of the family
or state, as can be stored. They are the elements of true riches;
for the amount of property which is needed for a good life is not
unlimited, although Solon in one of his poems says that 

"No bound to riches has been fixed for man. "

But there is a boundary fixed, just as there is in the other arts;
for the instruments of any art are never unlimited, either in number
or size, and riches may be defined as a number of instruments to be
used in a household or in a state. And so we see that there is a natural
art of acquisition which is practiced by managers of households and
by statesmen, and what is the reason of this. 

Part IX

There is another variety of the art of acquisition which is commonly
and rightly called an art of wealth-getting, and has in fact suggested
the notion that riches and property have no limit. Being nearly connected
with the preceding, it is often identified with it. But though they
are not very different, neither are they the same. The kind already
described is given by nature, the other is gained by experience and
art. 

Let us begin our discussion of the question with the following considerations:

Of everything which we possess there are two uses: both belong to
the thing as such, but not in the same manner, for one is the proper,
and the other the improper or secondary use of it. For example, a
shoe is used for wear, and is used for exchange; both are uses of
the shoe. He who gives a shoe in exchange for money or food to him
who wants one, does indeed use the shoe as a shoe, but this is not
its proper or primary purpose, for a shoe is not made to be an object
of barter. The same may be said of all possessions, for the art of
exchange extends to all of them, and it arises at first from what
is natural, from the circumstance that some have too little, others
too much. Hence we may infer that retail trade is not a natural part
of the art of getting wealth; had it been so, men would have ceased
to exchange when they had enough. In the first community, indeed,
which is the family, this art is obviously of no use, but it begins
to be useful when the society increases. For the members of the family
originally had all things in common; later, when the family divided
into parts, the parts shared in many things, and different parts in
different things, which they had to give in exchange for what they
wanted, a kind of barter which is still practiced among barbarous
nations who exchange with one another the necessaries of life and
nothing more; giving and receiving wine, for example, in exchange
for coin, and the like. This sort of barter is not part of the wealth-getting
art and is not contrary to nature, but is needed for the satisfaction
of men's natural wants. The other or more complex form of exchange
grew, as might have been inferred, out of the simpler. When the inhabitants
of one country became more dependent on those of another, and they
imported what they needed, and exported what they had too much of,
money necessarily came into use. For the various necessaries of life
are not easily carried about, and hence men agreed to employ in their
dealings with each other something which was intrinsically useful
and easily applicable to the purposes of life, for example, iron,
silver, and the like. Of this the value was at first measured simply
by size and weight, but in process of time they put a stamp upon it,
to save the trouble of weighing and to mark the value. 

When the use of coin had once been discovered, out of the barter of
necessary articles arose the other art of wealth getting, namely,
retail trade; which was at first probably a simple matter, but became
more complicated as soon as men learned by experience whence and by
what exchanges the greatest profit might be made. Originating in the
use of coin, the art of getting wealth is generally thought to be
chiefly concerned with it, and to be the art which produces riches
and wealth; having to consider how they may be accumulated. Indeed,
riches is assumed by many to be only a quantity of coin, because the
arts of getting wealth and retail trade are concerned with coin. Others
maintain that coined money is a mere sham, a thing not natural, but
conventional only, because, if the users substitute another commodity
for it, it is worthless, and because it is not useful as a means to
any of the necessities of life, and, indeed, he who is rich in coin
may often be in want of necessary food. But how can that be wealth
of which a man may have a great abundance and yet perish with hunger,
like Midas in the fable, whose insatiable prayer turned everything
that was set before him into gold? 

Hence men seek after a better notion of riches and of the art of getting
wealth than the mere acquisition of coin, and they are right. For
natural riches and the natural art of wealth-getting are a different
thing; in their true form they are part of the management of a household;
whereas retail trade is the art of producing wealth, not in every
way, but by exchange. And it is thought to be concerned with coin;
for coin is the unit of exchange and the measure or limit of it. And
there is no bound to the riches which spring from this art of wealth
getting. As in the art of medicine there is no limit to the pursuit
of health, and as in the other arts there is no limit to the pursuit
of their several ends, for they aim at accomplishing their ends to
the uttermost (but of the means there is a limit, for the end is always
the limit), so, too, in this art of wealth-getting there is no limit
of the end, which is riches of the spurious kind, and the acquisition
of wealth. But the art of wealth-getting which consists in household
management, on the other hand, has a limit; the unlimited acquisition
of wealth is not its business. And, therefore, in one point of view,
all riches must have a limit; nevertheless, as a matter of fact, we
find the opposite to be the case; for all getters of wealth increase
their hoard of coin without limit. The source of the confusion is
the near connection between the two kinds of wealth-getting; in either,
the instrument is the same, although the use is different, and so
they pass into one another; for each is a use of the same property,
but with a difference: accumulation is the end in the one case, but
there is a further end in the other. Hence some persons are led to
believe that getting wealth is the object of household management,
and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either to increase
their money without limit, or at any rate not to lose it. The origin
of this disposition in men is that they are intent upon living only,
and not upon living well; and, as their desires are unlimited they
also desire that the means of gratifying them should be without limit.
Those who do aim at a good life seek the means of obtaining bodily
pleasures; and, since the enjoyment of these appears to depend on
property, they are absorbed in getting wealth: and so there arises
the second species of wealth-getting. For, as their enjoyment is in
excess, they seek an art which produces the excess of enjoyment; and,
if they are not able to supply their pleasures by the art of getting
wealth, they try other arts, using in turn every faculty in a manner
contrary to nature. The quality of courage, for example, is not intended
to make wealth, but to inspire confidence; neither is this the aim
of the general's or of the physician's art; but the one aims at victory
and the other at health. Nevertheless, some men turn every quality
or art into a means of getting wealth; this they conceive to be the
end, and to the promotion of the end they think all things must contribute.

Thus, then, we have considered the art of wealth-getting which is
unnecessary, and why men want it; and also the necessary art of wealth-getting,
which we have seen to be different from the other, and to be a natural
part of the art of managing a household, concerned with the provision
of food, not, however, like the former kind, unlimited, but having
a limit. 

Part X

And we have found the answer to our original question, Whether the
art of getting wealth is the business of the manager of a household
and of the statesman or not their business? viz., that wealth is presupposed
by them. For as political science does not make men, but takes them
from nature and uses them, so too nature provides them with earth
or sea or the like as a source of food. At this stage begins the duty
of the manager of a household, who has to order the things which nature
supplies; he may be compared to the weaver who has not to make but
to use wool, and to know, too, what sort of wool is good and serviceable
or bad and unserviceable. Were this otherwise, it would be difficult
to see why the art of getting wealth is a part of the management of
a household and the art of medicine not; for surely the members of
a household must have health just as they must have life or any other
necessary. The answer is that as from one point of view the master
of the house and the ruler of the state have to consider about health,
from another point of view not they but the physician; so in one way
the art of household management, in another way the subordinate art,
has to consider about wealth. But, strictly speaking, as I have already
said, the means of life must be provided beforehand by nature; for
the business of nature is to furnish food to that which is born, and
the food of the offspring is always what remains over of that from
which it is produced. Wherefore the art of getting wealth out of fruits
and animals is always natural. 

There are two sorts of wealth-getting, as I have said; one is a part
of household management, the other is retail trade: the former necessary
and honorable, while that which consists in exchange is justly censured;
for it is unnatural, and a mode by which men gain from one another.
The most hated sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury, which
makes a gain out of money itself, and not from the natural object
of it. For money was intended to be used in exchange, but not to increase
at interest. And this term interest, which means the birth of money
from money, is applied to the breeding of money because the offspring
resembles the parent. Wherefore of an modes of getting wealth this
is the most unnatural. 

Part XI

Enough has been said about the theory of wealth-getting; we will now
proceed to the practical part. The discussion of such matters is not
unworthy of philosophy, but to be engaged in them practically is illiberal
and irksome. The useful parts of wealth-getting are, first, the knowledge
of livestock- which are most profitable, and where, and how- as, for
example, what sort of horses or sheep or oxen or any other animals
are most likely to give a return. A man ought to know which of these
pay better than others, and which pay best in particular places, for
some do better in one place and some in another. Secondly, husbandry,
which may be either tillage or planting, and the keeping of bees and
of fish, or fowl, or of any animals which may be useful to man. These
are the divisions of the true or proper art of wealth-getting and
come first. Of the other, which consists in exchange, the first and
most important division is commerce (of which there are three kinds-
the provision of a ship, the conveyance of goods, exposure for sale-
these again differing as they are safer or more profitable), the second
is usury, the third, service for hire- of this, one kind is employed
in the mechanical arts, the other in unskilled and bodily labor. There
is still a third sort of wealth getting intermediate between this
and the first or natural mode which is partly natural, but is also
concerned with exchange, viz., the industries that make their profit
from the earth, and from things growing from the earth which, although
they bear no fruit, are nevertheless profitable; for example, the
cutting of timber and all mining. The art of mining, by which minerals
are obtained, itself has many branches, for there are various kinds
of things dug out of the earth. Of the several divisions of wealth-getting
I now speak generally; a minute consideration of them might be useful
in practice, but it would be tiresome to dwell upon them at greater
length now. 

Those occupations are most truly arts in which there is the least
element of chance; they are the meanest in which the body is most
deteriorated, the most servile in which there is the greatest use
of the body, and the most illiberal in which there is the least need
of excellence. 

Works have been written upon these subjects by various persons; for
example, by Chares the Parian, and Apollodorus the Lemnian, who have
treated of Tillage and Planting, while others have treated of other
branches; any one who cares for such matters may refer to their writings.
It would be well also to collect the scattered stories of the ways
in which individuals have succeeded in amassing a fortune; for all
this is useful to persons who value the art of getting wealth. There
is the anecdote of Thales the Milesian and his financial device, which
involves a principle of universal application, but is attributed to
him on account of his reputation for wisdom. He was reproached for
his poverty, which was supposed to show that philosophy was of no
use. According to the story, he knew by his skill in the stars while
it was yet winter that there would be a great harvest of olives in
the coming year; so, having a little money, he gave deposits for the
use of all the olive-presses in Chios and Miletus, which he hired
at a low price because no one bid against him. When the harvest-time
came, and many were wanted all at once and of a sudden, he let them
out at any rate which he pleased, and made a quantity of money. Thus
he showed the world that philosophers can easily be rich if they like,
but that their ambition is of another sort. He is supposed to have
given a striking proof of his wisdom, but, as I was saying, his device
for getting wealth is of universal application, and is nothing but
the creation of a monopoly. It is an art often practiced by cities
when they are want of money; they make a monopoly of provisions.

There was a man of Sicily, who, having money deposited with him, bought
up an the iron from the iron mines; afterwards, when the merchants
from their various markets came to buy, he was the only seller, and
without much increasing the price he gained 200 per cent. Which when
Dionysius heard, he told him that he might take away his money, but
that he must not remain at Syracuse, for he thought that the man had
discovered a way of making money which was injurious to his own interests.
He made the same discovery as Thales; they both contrived to create
a monopoly for themselves. And statesmen as well ought to know these
things; for a state is often as much in want of money and of such
devices for obtaining it as a household, or even more so; hence some
public men devote themselves entirely to finance. 

Part XII

Of household management we have seen that there are three parts- one
is the rule of a master over slaves, which has been discussed already,
another of a father, and the third of a husband. A husband and father,
we saw, rules over wife and children, both free, but the rule differs,
the rule over his children being a royal, over his wife a constitutional
rule. For although there may be exceptions to the order of nature,
the male is by nature fitter for command than the female, just as
the elder and full-grown is superior to the younger and more immature.
But in most constitutional states the citizens rule and are ruled
by turns, for the idea of a constitutional state implies that the
natures of the citizens are equal, and do not differ at all. Nevertheless,
when one rules and the other is ruled we endeavor to create a difference
of outward forms and names and titles of respect, which may be illustrated
by the saying of Amasis about his foot-pan. The relation of the male
to the female is of this kind, but there the inequality is permanent.
The rule of a father over his children is royal, for he rules by virtue
both of love and of the respect due to age, exercising a kind of royal
power. And therefore Homer has appropriately called Zeus 'father of
Gods and men,' because he is the king of them all. For a king is the
natural superior of his subjects, but he should be of the same kin
or kind with them, and such is the relation of elder and younger,
of father and son. 

Part XIII

Thus it is clear that household management attends more to men than
to the acquisition of inanimate things, and to human excellence more
than to the excellence of property which we call wealth, and to the
virtue of freemen more than to the virtue of slaves. A question may
indeed be raised, whether there is any excellence at all in a slave
beyond and higher than merely instrumental and ministerial qualities-
whether he can have the virtues of temperance, courage, justice, and
the like; or whether slaves possess only bodily and ministerial qualities.
And, whichever way we answer the question, a difficulty arises; for,
if they have virtue, in what will they differ from freemen? On the
other hand, since they are men and share in rational principle, it
seems absurd to say that they have no virtue. A similar question may
be raised about women and children, whether they too have virtues:
ought a woman to be temperate and brave and just, and is a child to
be called temperate, and intemperate, or note So in general we may
ask about the natural ruler, and the natural subject, whether they
have the same or different virtues. For if a noble nature is equally
required in both, why should one of them always rule, and the other
always be ruled? Nor can we say that this is a question of degree,
for the difference between ruler and subject is a difference of kind,
which the difference of more and less never is. Yet how strange is
the supposition that the one ought, and that the other ought not,
to have virtue! For if the ruler is intemperate and unjust, how can
he rule well? If the subject, how can he obey well? If he be licentious
and cowardly, he will certainly not do his duty. It is evident, therefore,
that both of them must have a share of virtue, but varying as natural
subjects also vary among themselves. Here the very constitution of
the soul has shown us the way; in it one part naturally rules, and
the other is subject, and the virtue of the ruler we in maintain to
be different from that of the subject; the one being the virtue of
the rational, and the other of the irrational part. Now, it is obvious
that the same principle applies generally, and therefore almost all
things rule and are ruled according to nature. But the kind of rule
differs; the freeman rules over the slave after another manner from
that in which the male rules over the female, or the man over the
child; although the parts of the soul are present in an of them, they
are present in different degrees. For the slave has no deliberative
faculty at all; the woman has, but it is without authority, and the
child has, but it is immature. So it must necessarily be supposed
to be with the moral virtues also; all should partake of them, but
only in such manner and degree as is required by each for the fulfillment
of his duty. Hence the ruler ought to have moral virtue in perfection,
for his function, taken absolutely, demands a master artificer, and
rational principle is such an artificer; the subjects, oil the other
hand, require only that measure of virtue which is proper to each
of them. Clearly, then, moral virtue belongs to all of them; but the
temperance of a man and of a woman, or the courage and justice of
a man and of a woman, are not, as Socrates maintained, the same; the
courage of a man is shown in commanding, of a woman in obeying. And
this holds of all other virtues, as will be more clearly seen if we
look at them in detail, for those who say generally that virtue consists
in a good disposition of the soul, or in doing rightly, or the like,
only deceive themselves. Far better than such definitions is their
mode of speaking, who, like Gorgias, enumerate the virtues. All classes
must be deemed to have their special attributes; as the poet says
of women, 

"Silence is a woman's glory, "

but this is not equally the glory of man. The child is imperfect,
and therefore obviously his virtue is not relative to himself alone,
but to the perfect man and to his teacher, and in like manner the
virtue of the slave is relative to a master. Now we determined that
a slave is useful for the wants of life, and therefore he will obviously
require only so much virtue as will prevent him from failing in his
duty through cowardice or lack of self-control. Some one will ask
whether, if what we are saying is true, virtue will not be required
also in the artisans, for they often fail in their work through the
lack of self control? But is there not a great difference in the two
cases? For the slave shares in his master's life; the artisan is less
closely connected with him, and only attains excellence in proportion
as he becomes a slave. The meaner sort of mechanic has a special and
separate slavery; and whereas the slave exists by nature, not so the
shoemaker or other artisan. It is manifest, then, that the master
ought to be the source of such excellence in the slave, and not a
mere possessor of the art of mastership which trains the slave in
his duties. Wherefore they are mistaken who forbid us to converse
with slaves and say that we should employ command only, for slaves
stand even more in need of admonition than children. 

So much for this subject; the relations of husband and wife, parent
and child, their several virtues, what in their intercourse with one
another is good, and what is evil, and how we may pursue the good
and good and escape the evil, will have to be discussed when we speak
of the different forms of government. For, inasmuch as every family
is a part of a state, and these relationships are the parts of a family,
and the virtue of the part must have regard to the virtue of the whole,
women and children must be trained by education with an eye to the
constitution, if the virtues of either of them are supposed to make
any difference in the virtues of the state. And they must make a difference:
for the children grow up to be citizens, and half the free persons
in a state are women. 

Of these matters, enough has been said; of what remains, let us speak
at another time. Regarding, then, our present inquiry as complete,
we will make a new beginning. And, first, let us examine the various
theories of a perfect state. 

BOOK I

Part 1 

All instruction given or received by way of argument proceeds from
pre-existent knowledge. This becomes evident upon a survey of all
the species of such instruction. The mathematical sciences and all
other speculative disciplines are acquired in this way, and so are
the two forms of dialectical reasoning, syllogistic and inductive;
for each of these latter make use of old knowledge to impart new,
the syllogism assuming an audience that accepts its premisses, induction
exhibiting the universal as implicit in the clearly known particular.
Again, the persuasion exerted by rhetorical arguments is in principle
the same, since they use either example, a kind of induction, or enthymeme,
a form of syllogism. 

The pre-existent knowledge required is of two kinds. In some cases
admission of the fact must be assumed, in others comprehension of
the meaning of the term used, and sometimes both assumptions are essential.
Thus, we assume that every predicate can be either truly affirmed
or truly denied of any subject, and that 'triangle' means so and so;
as regards 'unit' we have to make the double assumption of the meaning
of the word and the existence of the thing. The reason is that these
several objects are not equally obvious to us. Recognition of a truth
may in some cases contain as factors both previous knowledge and also
knowledge acquired simultaneously with that recognition-knowledge,
this latter, of the particulars actually falling under the universal
and therein already virtually known. For example, the student knew
beforehand that the angles of every triangle are equal to two right
angles; but it was only at the actual moment at which he was being
led on to recognize this as true in the instance before him that he
came to know 'this figure inscribed in the semicircle' to be a triangle.
For some things (viz. the singulars finally reached which are not
predicable of anything else as subject) are only learnt in this way,
i.e. there is here no recognition through a middle of a minor term
as subject to a major. Before he was led on to recognition or before
he actually drew a conclusion, we should perhaps say that in a manner
he knew, in a manner not. 

If he did not in an unqualified sense of the term know the existence
of this triangle, how could he know without qualification that its
angles were equal to two right angles? No: clearly he knows not without
qualification but only in the sense that he knows universally. If
this distinction is not drawn, we are faced with the dilemma in the
Meno: either a man will learn nothing or what he already knows; for
we cannot accept the solution which some people offer. A man is asked,
'Do you, or do you not, know that every pair is even?' He says he
does know it. The questioner then produces a particular pair, of the
existence, and so a fortiori of the evenness, of which he was unaware.
The solution which some people offer is to assert that they do not
know that every pair is even, but only that everything which they
know to be a pair is even: yet what they know to be even is that of
which they have demonstrated evenness, i.e. what they made the subject
of their premiss, viz. not merely every triangle or number which they
know to be such, but any and every number or triangle without reservation.
For no premiss is ever couched in the form 'every number which you
know to be such', or 'every rectilinear figure which you know to be
such': the predicate is always construed as applicable to any and
every instance of the thing. On the other hand, I imagine there is
nothing to prevent a man in one sense knowing what he is learning,
in another not knowing it. The strange thing would be, not if in some
sense he knew what he was learning, but if he were to know it in that
precise sense and manner in which he was learning it. 

Part 2

We suppose ourselves to possess unqualified scientific knowledge of
a thing, as opposed to knowing it in the accidental way in which the
sophist knows, when we think that we know the cause on which the fact
depends, as the cause of that fact and of no other, and, further,
that the fact could not be other than it is. Now that scientific knowing
is something of this sort is evident-witness both those who falsely
claim it and those who actually possess it, since the former merely
imagine themselves to be, while the latter are also actually, in the
condition described. Consequently the proper object of unqualified
scientific knowledge is something which cannot be other than it is.

There may be another manner of knowing as well-that will be discussed
later. What I now assert is that at all events we do know by demonstration.
By demonstration I mean a syllogism productive of scientific knowledge,
a syllogism, that is, the grasp of which is eo ipso such knowledge.
Assuming then that my thesis as to the nature of scientific knowing
is correct, the premisses of demonstrated knowledge must be true,
primary, immediate, better known than and prior to the conclusion,
which is further related to them as effect to cause. Unless these
conditions are satisfied, the basic truths will not be 'appropriate'
to the conclusion. Syllogism there may indeed be without these conditions,
but such syllogism, not being productive of scientific knowledge,
will not be demonstration. The premisses must be true: for that which
is non-existent cannot be known-we cannot know, e.g. that the diagonal
of a square is commensurate with its side. The premisses must be primary
and indemonstrable; otherwise they will require demonstration in order
to be known, since to have knowledge, if it be not accidental knowledge,
of things which are demonstrable, means precisely to have a demonstration
of them. The premisses must be the causes of the conclusion, better
known than it, and prior to it; its causes, since we possess scientific
knowledge of a thing only when we know its cause; prior, in order
to be causes; antecedently known, this antecedent knowledge being
not our mere understanding of the meaning, but knowledge of the fact
as well. Now 'prior' and 'better known' are ambiguous terms, for there
is a difference between what is prior and better known in the order
of being and what is prior and better known to man. I mean that objects
nearer to sense are prior and better known to man; objects without
qualification prior and better known are those further from sense.
Now the most universal causes are furthest from sense and particular
causes are nearest to sense, and they are thus exactly opposed to
one another. In saying that the premisses of demonstrated knowledge
must be primary, I mean that they must be the 'appropriate' basic
truths, for I identify primary premiss and basic truth. A 'basic truth'
in a demonstration is an immediate proposition. An immediate proposition
is one which has no other proposition prior to it. A proposition is
either part of an enunciation, i.e. it predicates a single attribute
of a single subject. If a proposition is dialectical, it assumes either
part indifferently; if it is demonstrative, it lays down one part
to the definite exclusion of the other because that part is true.
The term 'enunciation' denotes either part of a contradiction indifferently.
A contradiction is an opposition which of its own nature excludes
a middle. The part of a contradiction which conjoins a predicate with
a subject is an affirmation; the part disjoining them is a negation.
I call an immediate basic truth of syllogism a 'thesis' when, though
it is not susceptible of proof by the teacher, yet ignorance of it
does not constitute a total bar to progress on the part of the pupil:
one which the pupil must know if he is to learn anything whatever
is an axiom. I call it an axiom because there are such truths and
we give them the name of axioms par excellence. If a thesis assumes
one part or the other of an enunciation, i.e. asserts either the existence
or the non-existence of a subject, it is a hypothesis; if it does
not so assert, it is a definition. Definition is a 'thesis' or a 'laying
something down', since the arithmetician lays it down that to be a
unit is to be quantitatively indivisible; but it is not a hypothesis,
for to define what a unit is is not the same as to affirm its existence.

Now since the required ground of our knowledge-i.e. of our conviction-of
a fact is the possession of such a syllogism as we call demonstration,
and the ground of the syllogism is the facts constituting its premisses,
we must not only know the primary premisses-some if not all of them-beforehand,
but know them better than the conclusion: for the cause of an attribute's
inherence in a subject always itself inheres in the subject more firmly
than that attribute; e.g. the cause of our loving anything is dearer
to us than the object of our love. So since the primary premisses
are the cause of our knowledge-i.e. of our conviction-it follows that
we know them better-that is, are more convinced of them-than their
consequences, precisely because of our knowledge of the latter is
the effect of our knowledge of the premisses. Now a man cannot believe
in anything more than in the things he knows, unless he has either
actual knowledge of it or something better than actual knowledge.
But we are faced with this paradox if a student whose belief rests
on demonstration has not prior knowledge; a man must believe in some,
if not in all, of the basic truths more than in the conclusion. Moreover,
if a man sets out to acquire the scientific knowledge that comes through
demonstration, he must not only have a better knowledge of the basic
truths and a firmer conviction of them than of the connexion which
is being demonstrated: more than this, nothing must be more certain
or better known to him than these basic truths in their character
as contradicting the fundamental premisses which lead to the opposed
and erroneous conclusion. For indeed the conviction of pure science
must be unshakable. 

Part 3

Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary premisses,
there is no scientific knowledge. Others think there is, but that
all truths are demonstrable. Neither doctrine is either true or a
necessary deduction from the premisses. The first school, assuming
that there is no way of knowing other than by demonstration, maintain
that an infinite regress is involved, on the ground that if behind
the prior stands no primary, we could not know the posterior through
the prior (wherein they are right, for one cannot traverse an infinite
series): if on the other hand-they say-the series terminates and there
are primary premisses, yet these are unknowable because incapable
of demonstration, which according to them is the only form of knowledge.
And since thus one cannot know the primary premisses, knowledge of
the conclusions which follow from them is not pure scientific knowledge
nor properly knowing at all, but rests on the mere supposition that
the premisses are true. The other party agree with them as regards
knowing, holding that it is only possible by demonstration, but they
see no difficulty in holding that all truths are demonstrated, on
the ground that demonstration may be circular and reciprocal.

Our own doctrine is that not all knowledge is demonstrative: on the
contrary, knowledge of the immediate premisses is independent of demonstration.
(The necessity of this is obvious; for since we must know the prior
premisses from which the demonstration is drawn, and since the regress
must end in immediate truths, those truths must be indemonstrable.)
Such, then, is our doctrine, and in addition we maintain that besides
scientific knowledge there is its originative source which enables
us to recognize the definitions. 

Now demonstration must be based on premisses prior to and better known
than the conclusion; and the same things cannot simultaneously be
both prior and posterior to one another: so circular demonstration
is clearly not possible in the unqualified sense of 'demonstration',
but only possible if 'demonstration' be extended to include that other
method of argument which rests on a distinction between truths prior
to us and truths without qualification prior, i.e. the method by which
induction produces knowledge. But if we accept this extension of its
meaning, our definition of unqualified knowledge will prove faulty;
for there seem to be two kinds of it. Perhaps, however, the second
form of demonstration, that which proceeds from truths better known
to us, is not demonstration in the unqualified sense of the term.

The advocates of circular demonstration are not only faced with the
difficulty we have just stated: in addition their theory reduces to
the mere statement that if a thing exists, then it does exist-an easy
way of proving anything. That this is so can be clearly shown by taking
three terms, for to constitute the circle it makes no difference whether
many terms or few or even only two are taken. Thus by direct proof,
if A is, B must be; if B is, C must be; therefore if A is, C must
be. Since then-by the circular proof-if A is, B must be, and if B
is, A must be, A may be substituted for C above. Then 'if B is, A
must be'='if B is, C must be', which above gave the conclusion 'if
A is, C must be': but C and A have been identified. Consequently the
upholders of circular demonstration are in the position of saying
that if A is, A must be-a simple way of proving anything. Moreover,
even such circular demonstration is impossible except in the case
of attributes that imply one another, viz. 'peculiar' properties.

Now, it has been shown that the positing of one thing-be it one term
or one premiss-never involves a necessary consequent: two premisses
constitute the first and smallest foundation for drawing a conclusion
at all and therefore a fortiori for the demonstrative syllogism of
science. If, then, A is implied in B and C, and B and C are reciprocally
implied in one another and in A, it is possible, as has been shown
in my writings on the syllogism, to prove all the assumptions on which
the original conclusion rested, by circular demonstration in the first
figure. But it has also been shown that in the other figures either
no conclusion is possible, or at least none which proves both the
original premisses. Propositions the terms of which are not convertible
cannot be circularly demonstrated at all, and since convertible terms
occur rarely in actual demonstrations, it is clearly frivolous and
impossible to say that demonstration is reciprocal and that therefore
everything can be demonstrated. 

Part 4

Since the object of pure scientific knowledge cannot be other than
it is, the truth obtained by demonstrative knowledge will be necessary.
And since demonstrative knowledge is only present when we have a demonstration,
it follows that demonstration is an inference from necessary premisses.
So we must consider what are the premisses of demonstration-i.e. what
is their character: and as a preliminary, let us define what we mean
by an attribute 'true in every instance of its subject', an 'essential'
attribute, and a 'commensurate and universal' attribute. I call 'true
in every instance' what is truly predicable of all instances-not of
one to the exclusion of others-and at all times, not at this or that
time only; e.g. if animal is truly predicable of every instance of
man, then if it be true to say 'this is a man', 'this is an animal'
is also true, and if the one be true now the other is true now. A
corresponding account holds if point is in every instance predicable
as contained in line. There is evidence for this in the fact that
the objection we raise against a proposition put to us as true in
every instance is either an instance in which, or an occasion on which,
it is not true. Essential attributes are (1) such as belong to their
subject as elements in its essential nature (e.g. line thus belongs
to triangle, point to line; for the very being or 'substance' of triangle
and line is composed of these elements, which are contained in the
formulae defining triangle and line): (2) such that, while they belong
to certain subjects, the subjects to which they belong are contained
in the attribute's own defining formula. Thus straight and curved
belong to line, odd and even, prime and compound, square and oblong,
to number; and also the formula defining any one of these attributes
contains its subject-e.g. line or number as the case may be.

Extending this classification to all other attributes, I distinguish
those that answer the above description as belonging essentially to
their respective subjects; whereas attributes related in neither of
these two ways to their subjects I call accidents or 'coincidents';
e.g. musical or white is a 'coincident' of animal. 

Further (a) that is essential which is not predicated of a subject
other than itself: e.g. 'the walking [thing]' walks and is white in
virtue of being something else besides; whereas substance, in the
sense of whatever signifies a 'this somewhat', is not what it is in
virtue of being something else besides. Things, then, not predicated
of a subject I call essential; things predicated of a subject I call
accidental or 'coincidental'. 

In another sense again (b) a thing consequentially connected with
anything is essential; one not so connected is 'coincidental'. An
example of the latter is 'While he was walking it lightened': the
lightning was not due to his walking; it was, we should say, a coincidence.
If, on the other hand, there is a consequential connexion, the predication
is essential; e.g. if a beast dies when its throat is being cut, then
its death is also essentially connected with the cutting, because
the cutting was the cause of death, not death a 'coincident' of the
cutting. 

So far then as concerns the sphere of connexions scientifically known
in the unqualified sense of that term, all attributes which (within
that sphere) are essential either in the sense that their subjects
are contained in them, or in the sense that they are contained in
their subjects, are necessary as well as consequentially connected
with their subjects. For it is impossible for them not to inhere in
their subjects either simply or in the qualified sense that one or
other of a pair of opposites must inhere in the subject; e.g. in line
must be either straightness or curvature, in number either oddness
or evenness. For within a single identical genus the contrary of a
given attribute is either its privative or its contradictory; e.g.
within number what is not odd is even, inasmuch as within this sphere
even is a necessary consequent of not-odd. So, since any given predicate
must be either affirmed or denied of any subject, essential attributes
must inhere in their subjects of necessity. 

Thus, then, we have established the distinction between the attribute
which is 'true in every instance' and the 'essential' attribute.

I term 'commensurately universal' an attribute which belongs to every
instance of its subject, and to every instance essentially and as
such; from which it clearly follows that all commensurate universals
inhere necessarily in their subjects. The essential attribute, and
the attribute that belongs to its subject as such, are identical.
E.g. point and straight belong to line essentially, for they belong
to line as such; and triangle as such has two right angles, for it
is essentially equal to two right angles. 

An attribute belongs commensurately and universally to a subject when
it can be shown to belong to any random instance of that subject and
when the subject is the first thing to which it can be shown to belong.
Thus, e.g. (1) the equality of its angles to two right angles is not
a commensurately universal attribute of figure. For though it is possible
to show that a figure has its angles equal to two right angles, this
attribute cannot be demonstrated of any figure selected at haphazard,
nor in demonstrating does one take a figure at random-a square is
a figure but its angles are not equal to two right angles. On the
other hand, any isosceles triangle has its angles equal to two right
angles, yet isosceles triangle is not the primary subject of this
attribute but triangle is prior. So whatever can be shown to have
its angles equal to two right angles, or to possess any other attribute,
in any random instance of itself and primarily-that is the first subject
to which the predicate in question belongs commensurately and universally,
and the demonstration, in the essential sense, of any predicate is
the proof of it as belonging to this first subject commensurately
and universally: while the proof of it as belonging to the other subjects
to which it attaches is demonstration only in a secondary and unessential
sense. Nor again (2) is equality to two right angles a commensurately
universal attribute of isosceles; it is of wider application.

Part 5

We must not fail to observe that we often fall into error because
our conclusion is not in fact primary and commensurately universal
in the sense in which we think we prove it so. We make this mistake
(1) when the subject is an individual or individuals above which there
is no universal to be found: (2) when the subjects belong to different
species and there is a higher universal, but it has no name: (3) when
the subject which the demonstrator takes as a whole is really only
a part of a larger whole; for then the demonstration will be true
of the individual instances within the part and will hold in every
instance of it, yet the demonstration will not be true of this subject
primarily and commensurately and universally. When a demonstration
is true of a subject primarily and commensurately and universally,
that is to be taken to mean that it is true of a given subject primarily
and as such. Case (3) may be thus exemplified. If a proof were given
that perpendiculars to the same line are parallel, it might be supposed
that lines thus perpendicular were the proper subject of the demonstration
because being parallel is true of every instance of them. But it is
not so, for the parallelism depends not on these angles being equal
to one another because each is a right angle, but simply on their
being equal to one another. An example of (1) would be as follows:
if isosceles were the only triangle, it would be thought to have its
angles equal to two right angles qua isosceles. An instance of (2)
would be the law that proportionals alternate. Alternation used to
be demonstrated separately of numbers, lines, solids, and durations,
though it could have been proved of them all by a single demonstration.
Because there was no single name to denote that in which numbers,
lengths, durations, and solids are identical, and because they differed
specifically from one another, this property was proved of each of
them separately. To-day, however, the proof is commensurately universal,
for they do not possess this attribute qua lines or qua numbers, but
qua manifesting this generic character which they are postulated as
possessing universally. Hence, even if one prove of each kind of triangle
that its angles are equal to two right angles, whether by means of
the same or different proofs; still, as long as one treats separately
equilateral, scalene, and isosceles, one does not yet know, except
sophistically, that triangle has its angles equal to two right angles,
nor does one yet know that triangle has this property commensurately
and universally, even if there is no other species of triangle but
these. For one does not know that triangle as such has this property,
nor even that 'all' triangles have it-unless 'all' means 'each taken
singly': if 'all' means 'as a whole class', then, though there be
none in which one does not recognize this property, one does not know
it of 'all triangles'. 

When, then, does our knowledge fail of commensurate universality,
and when it is unqualified knowledge? If triangle be identical in
essence with equilateral, i.e. with each or all equilaterals, then
clearly we have unqualified knowledge: if on the other hand it be
not, and the attribute belongs to equilateral qua triangle; then our
knowledge fails of commensurate universality. 'But', it will be asked,
'does this attribute belong to the subject of which it has been demonstrated
qua triangle or qua isosceles? What is the point at which the subject.
to which it belongs is primary? (i.e. to what subject can it be demonstrated
as belonging commensurately and universally?)' Clearly this point
is the first term in which it is found to inhere as the elimination
of inferior differentiae proceeds. Thus the angles of a brazen isosceles
triangle are equal to two right angles: but eliminate brazen and isosceles
and the attribute remains. 'But'-you may say-'eliminate figure or
limit, and the attribute vanishes.' True, but figure and limit are
not the first differentiae whose elimination destroys the attribute.
'Then what is the first?' If it is triangle, it will be in virtue
of triangle that the attribute belongs to all the other subjects of
which it is predicable, and triangle is the subject to which it can
be demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally.

Part 6

Demonstrative knowledge must rest on necessary basic truths; for the
object of scientific knowledge cannot be other than it is. Now attributes
attaching essentially to their subjects attach necessarily to them:
for essential attributes are either elements in the essential nature
of their subjects, or contain their subjects as elements in their
own essential nature. (The pairs of opposites which the latter class
includes are necessary because one member or the other necessarily
inheres.) It follows from this that premisses of the demonstrative
syllogism must be connexions essential in the sense explained: for
all attributes must inhere essentially or else be accidental, and
accidental attributes are not necessary to their subjects.

We must either state the case thus, or else premise that the conclusion
of demonstration is necessary and that a demonstrated conclusion cannot
be other than it is, and then infer that the conclusion must be developed
from necessary premisses. For though you may reason from true premisses
without demonstrating, yet if your premisses are necessary you will
assuredly demonstrate-in such necessity you have at once a distinctive
character of demonstration. That demonstration proceeds from necessary
premisses is also indicated by the fact that the objection we raise
against a professed demonstration is that a premiss of it is not a
necessary truth-whether we think it altogether devoid of necessity,
or at any rate so far as our opponent's previous argument goes. This
shows how naive it is to suppose one's basic truths rightly chosen
if one starts with a proposition which is (1) popularly accepted and
(2) true, such as the sophists' assumption that to know is the same
as to possess knowledge. For (1) popular acceptance or rejection is
no criterion of a basic truth, which can only be the primary law of
the genus constituting the subject matter of the demonstration; and
(2) not all truth is 'appropriate'. 

A further proof that the conclusion must be the development of necessary
premisses is as follows. Where demonstration is possible, one who
can give no account which includes the cause has no scientific knowledge.
If, then, we suppose a syllogism in which, though A necessarily inheres
in C, yet B, the middle term of the demonstration, is not necessarily
connected with A and C, then the man who argues thus has no reasoned
knowledge of the conclusion, since this conclusion does not owe its
necessity to the middle term; for though the conclusion is necessary,
the mediating link is a contingent fact. Or again, if a man is without
knowledge now, though he still retains the steps of the argument,
though there is no change in himself or in the fact and no lapse of
memory on his part; then neither had he knowledge previously. But
the mediating link, not being necessary, may have perished in the
interval; and if so, though there be no change in him nor in the fact,
and though he will still retain the steps of the argument, yet he
has not knowledge, and therefore had not knowledge before. Even if
the link has not actually perished but is liable to perish, this situation
is possible and might occur. But such a condition cannot be knowledge.

When the conclusion is necessary, the middle through which it was
proved may yet quite easily be non-necessary. You can in fact infer
the necessary even from a non-necessary premiss, just as you can infer
the true from the not true. On the other hand, when the middle is
necessary the conclusion must be necessary; just as true premisses
always give a true conclusion. Thus, if A is necessarily predicated
of B and B of C, then A is necessarily predicated of C. But when the
conclusion is nonnecessary the middle cannot be necessary either.
Thus: let A be predicated non-necessarily of C but necessarily of
B, and let B be a necessary predicate of C; then A too will be a necessary
predicate of C, which by hypothesis it is not. 

To sum up, then: demonstrative knowledge must be knowledge of a necessary
nexus, and therefore must clearly be obtained through a necessary
middle term; otherwise its possessor will know neither the cause nor
the fact that his conclusion is a necessary connexion. Either he will
mistake the non-necessary for the necessary and believe the necessity
of the conclusion without knowing it, or else he will not even believe
it-in which case he will be equally ignorant, whether he actually
infers the mere fact through middle terms or the reasoned fact and
from immediate premisses. 

Of accidents that are not essential according to our definition of
essential there is no demonstrative knowledge; for since an accident,
in the sense in which I here speak of it, may also not inhere, it
is impossible to prove its inherence as a necessary conclusion. A
difficulty, however, might be raised as to why in dialectic, if the
conclusion is not a necessary connexion, such and such determinate
premisses should be proposed in order to deal with such and such determinate
problems. Would not the result be the same if one asked any questions
whatever and then merely stated one's conclusion? The solution is
that determinate questions have to be put, not because the replies
to them affirm facts which necessitate facts affirmed by the conclusion,
but because these answers are propositions which if the answerer affirm,
he must affirm the conclusion and affirm it with truth if they are
true. 

Since it is just those attributes within every genus which are essential
and possessed by their respective subjects as such that are necessary
it is clear that both the conclusions and the premisses of demonstrations
which produce scientific knowledge are essential. For accidents are
not necessary: and, further, since accidents are not necessary one
does not necessarily have reasoned knowledge of a conclusion drawn
from them (this is so even if the accidental premisses are invariable
but not essential, as in proofs through signs; for though the conclusion
be actually essential, one will not know it as essential nor know
its reason); but to have reasoned knowledge of a conclusion is to
know it through its cause. We may conclude that the middle must be
consequentially connected with the minor, and the major with the middle.

Part 7

It follows that we cannot in demonstrating pass from one genus to
another. We cannot, for instance, prove geometrical truths by arithmetic.
For there are three elements in demonstration: (1) what is proved,
the conclusion-an attribute inhering essentially in a genus; (2) the
axioms, i.e. axioms which are premisses of demonstration; (3) the
subject-genus whose attributes, i.e. essential properties, are revealed
by the demonstration. The axioms which are premisses of demonstration
may be identical in two or more sciences: but in the case of two different
genera such as arithmetic and geometry you cannot apply arithmetical
demonstration to the properties of magnitudes unless the magnitudes
in question are numbers. How in certain cases transference is possible
I will explain later. 

Arithmetical demonstration and the other sciences likewise possess,
each of them, their own genera; so that if the demonstration is to
pass from one sphere to another, the genus must be either absolutely
or to some extent the same. If this is not so, transference is clearly
impossible, because the extreme and the middle terms must be drawn
from the same genus: otherwise, as predicated, they will not be essential
and will thus be accidents. That is why it cannot be proved by geometry
that opposites fall under one science, nor even that the product of
two cubes is a cube. Nor can the theorem of any one science be demonstrated
by means of another science, unless these theorems are related as
subordinate to superior (e.g. as optical theorems to geometry or harmonic
theorems to arithmetic). Geometry again cannot prove of lines any
property which they do not possess qua lines, i.e. in virtue of the
fundamental truths of their peculiar genus: it cannot show, for example,
that the straight line is the most beautiful of lines or the contrary
of the circle; for these qualities do not belong to lines in virtue
of their peculiar genus, but through some property which it shares
with other genera. 

Part 8

It is also clear that if the premisses from which the syllogism proceeds
are commensurately universal, the conclusion of such i.e. in the unqualified
sense-must also be eternal. Therefore no attribute can be demonstrated
nor known by strictly scientific knowledge to inhere in perishable
things. The proof can only be accidental, because the attribute's
connexion with its perishable subject is not commensurately universal
but temporary and special. If such a demonstration is made, one premiss
must be perishable and not commensurately universal (perishable because
only if it is perishable will the conclusion be perishable; not commensurately
universal, because the predicate will be predicable of some instances
of the subject and not of others); so that the conclusion can only
be that a fact is true at the moment-not commensurately and universally.
The same is true of definitions, since a definition is either a primary
premiss or a conclusion of a demonstration, or else only differs from
a demonstration in the order of its terms. Demonstration and science
of merely frequent occurrences-e.g. of eclipse as happening to the
moon-are, as such, clearly eternal: whereas so far as they are not
eternal they are not fully commensurate. Other subjects too have properties
attaching to them in the same way as eclipse attaches to the moon.

Part 9

It is clear that if the conclusion is to show an attribute inhering
as such, nothing can be demonstrated except from its 'appropriate'
basic truths. Consequently a proof even from true, indemonstrable,
and immediate premisses does not constitute knowledge. Such proofs
are like Bryson's method of squaring the circle; for they operate
by taking as their middle a common character-a character, therefore,
which the subject may share with another-and consequently they apply
equally to subjects different in kind. They therefore afford knowledge
of an attribute only as inhering accidentally, not as belonging to
its subject as such: otherwise they would not have been applicable
to another genus. 

Our knowledge of any attribute's connexion with a subject is accidental
unless we know that connexion through the middle term in virtue of
which it inheres, and as an inference from basic premisses essential
and 'appropriate' to the subject-unless we know, e.g. the property
of possessing angles equal to two right angles as belonging to that
subject in which it inheres essentially, and as inferred from basic
premisses essential and 'appropriate' to that subject: so that if
that middle term also belongs essentially to the minor, the middle
must belong to the same kind as the major and minor terms. The only
exceptions to this rule are such cases as theorems in harmonics which
are demonstrable by arithmetic. Such theorems are proved by the same
middle terms as arithmetical properties, but with a qualification-the
fact falls under a separate science (for the subject genus is separate),
but the reasoned fact concerns the superior science, to which the
attributes essentially belong. Thus, even these apparent exceptions
show that no attribute is strictly demonstrable except from its 'appropriate'
basic truths, which, however, in the case of these sciences have the
requisite identity of character. 

It is no less evident that the peculiar basic truths of each inhering
attribute are indemonstrable; for basic truths from which they might
be deduced would be basic truths of all that is, and the science to
which they belonged would possess universal sovereignty. This is so
because he knows better whose knowledge is deduced from higher causes,
for his knowledge is from prior premisses when it derives from causes
themselves uncaused: hence, if he knows better than others or best
of all, his knowledge would be science in a higher or the highest
degree. But, as things are, demonstration is not transferable to another
genus, with such exceptions as we have mentioned of the application
of geometrical demonstrations to theorems in mechanics or optics,
or of arithmetical demonstrations to those of harmonics.

It is hard to be sure whether one knows or not; for it is hard to
be sure whether one's knowledge is based on the basic truths appropriate
to each attribute-the differentia of true knowledge. We think we have
scientific knowledge if we have reasoned from true and primary premisses.
But that is not so: the conclusion must be homogeneous with the basic
facts of the science. 

Part 10

I call the basic truths of every genus those clements in it the existence
of which cannot be proved. As regards both these primary truths and
the attributes dependent on them the meaning of the name is assumed.
The fact of their existence as regards the primary truths must be
assumed; but it has to be proved of the remainder, the attributes.
Thus we assume the meaning alike of unity, straight, and triangular;
but while as regards unity and magnitude we assume also the fact of
their existence, in the case of the remainder proof is required.

Of the basic truths used in the demonstrative sciences some are peculiar
to each science, and some are common, but common only in the sense
of analogous, being of use only in so far as they fall within the
genus constituting the province of the science in question.

Peculiar truths are, e.g. the definitions of line and straight; common
truths are such as 'take equals from equals and equals remain'. Only
so much of these common truths is required as falls within the genus
in question: for a truth of this kind will have the same force even
if not used generally but applied by the geometer only to magnitudes,
or by the arithmetician only to numbers. Also peculiar to a science
are the subjects the existence as well as the meaning of which it
assumes, and the essential attributes of which it investigates, e.g.
in arithmetic units, in geometry points and lines. Both the existence
and the meaning of the subjects are assumed by these sciences; but
of their essential attributes only the meaning is assumed. For example
arithmetic assumes the meaning of odd and even, square and cube, geometry
that of incommensurable, or of deflection or verging of lines, whereas
the existence of these attributes is demonstrated by means of the
axioms and from previous conclusions as premisses. Astronomy too proceeds
in the same way. For indeed every demonstrative science has three
elements: (1) that which it posits, the subject genus whose essential
attributes it examines; (2) the so-called axioms, which are primary
premisses of its demonstration; (3) the attributes, the meaning of
which it assumes. Yet some sciences may very well pass over some of
these elements; e.g. we might not expressly posit the existence of
the genus if its existence were obvious (for instance, the existence
of hot and cold is more evident than that of number); or we might
omit to assume expressly the meaning of the attributes if it were
well understood. In the way the meaning of axioms, such as 'Take equals
from equals and equals remain', is well known and so not expressly
assumed. Nevertheless in the nature of the case the essential elements
of demonstration are three: the subject, the attributes, and the basic
premisses. 

That which expresses necessary self-grounded fact, and which we must
necessarily believe, is distinct both from the hypotheses of a science
and from illegitimate postulate-I say 'must believe', because all
syllogism, and therefore a fortiori demonstration, is addressed not
to the spoken word, but to the discourse within the soul, and though
we can always raise objections to the spoken word, to the inward discourse
we cannot always object. That which is capable of proof but assumed
by the teacher without proof is, if the pupil believes and accepts
it, hypothesis, though only in a limited sense hypothesis-that is,
relatively to the pupil; if the pupil has no opinion or a contrary
opinion on the matter, the same assumption is an illegitimate postulate.
Therein lies the distinction between hypothesis and illegitimate postulate:
the latter is the contrary of the pupil's opinion, demonstrable, but
assumed and used without demonstration. 

The definition-viz. those which are not expressed as statements that
anything is or is not-are not hypotheses: but it is in the premisses
of a science that its hypotheses are contained. Definitions require
only to be understood, and this is not hypothesis-unless it be contended
that the pupil's hearing is also an hypothesis required by the teacher.
Hypotheses, on the contrary, postulate facts on the being of which
depends the being of the fact inferred. Nor are the geometer's hypotheses
false, as some have held, urging that one must not employ falsehood
and that the geometer is uttering falsehood in stating that the line
which he draws is a foot long or straight, when it is actually neither.
The truth is that the geometer does not draw any conclusion from the
being of the particular line of which he speaks, but from what his
diagrams symbolize. A further distinction is that all hypotheses and
illegitimate postulates are either universal or particular, whereas
a definition is neither. 

Part 11

So demonstration does not necessarily imply the being of Forms nor
a One beside a Many, but it does necessarily imply the possibility
of truly predicating one of many; since without this possibility we
cannot save the universal, and if the universal goes, the middle term
goes witb. it, and so demonstration becomes impossible. We conclude,
then, that there must be a single identical term unequivocally predicable
of a number of individuals. 

The law that it is impossible to affirm and deny simultaneously the
same predicate of the same subject is not expressly posited by any
demonstration except when the conclusion also has to be expressed
in that form; in which case the proof lays down as its major premiss
that the major is truly affirmed of the middle but falsely denied.
It makes no difference, however, if we add to the middle, or again
to the minor term, the corresponding negative. For grant a minor term
of which it is true to predicate man-even if it be also true to predicate
not-man of it--still grant simply that man is animal and not not-animal,
and the conclusion follows: for it will still be true to say that
Callias--even if it be also true to say that not-Callias--is animal
and not not-animal. The reason is that the major term is predicable
not only of the middle, but of something other than the middle as
well, being of wider application; so that the conclusion is not affected
even if the middle is extended to cover the original middle term and
also what is not the original middle term. 

The law that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly
denied of every subject is posited by such demonstration as uses reductio
ad impossibile, and then not always universally, but so far as it
is requisite; within the limits, that is, of the genus-the genus,
I mean (as I have already explained), to which the man of science
applies his demonstrations. In virtue of the common elements of demonstration-I
mean the common axioms which are used as premisses of demonstration,
not the subjects nor the attributes demonstrated as belonging to them-all
the sciences have communion with one another, and in communion with
them all is dialectic and any science which might attempt a universal
proof of axioms such as the law of excluded middle, the law that the
subtraction of equals from equals leaves equal remainders, or other
axioms of the same kind. Dialectic has no definite sphere of this
kind, not being confined to a single genus. Otherwise its method would
not be interrogative; for the interrogative method is barred to the
demonstrator, who cannot use the opposite facts to prove the same
nexus. This was shown in my work on the syllogism. 

Part 12

If a syllogistic question is equivalent to a proposition embodying
one of the two sides of a contradiction, and if each science has its
peculiar propositions from which its peculiar conclusion is developed,
then there is such a thing as a distinctively scientific question,
and it is the interrogative form of the premisses from which the 'appropriate'
conclusion of each science is developed. Hence it is clear that not
every question will be relevant to geometry, nor to medicine, nor
to any other science: only those questions will be geometrical which
form premisses for the proof of the theorems of geometry or of any
other science, such as optics, which uses the same basic truths as
geometry. Of the other sciences the like is true. Of these questions
the geometer is bound to give his account, using the basic truths
of geometry in conjunction with his previous conclusions; of the basic
truths the geometer, as such, is not bound to give any account. The
like is true of the other sciences. There is a limit, then, to the
questions which we may put to each man of science; nor is each man
of science bound to answer all inquiries on each several subject,
but only such as fall within the defined field of his own science.
If, then, in controversy with a geometer qua geometer the disputant
confines himself to geometry and proves anything from geometrical
premisses, he is clearly to be applauded; if he goes outside these
he will be at fault, and obviously cannot even refute the geometer
except accidentally. One should therefore not discuss geometry among
those who are not geometers, for in such a company an unsound argument
will pass unnoticed. This is correspondingly true in the other sciences.

Since there are 'geometrical' questions, does it follow that there
are also distinctively 'ungeometrical' questions? Further, in each
special science-geometry for instance-what kind of error is it that
may vitiate questions, and yet not exclude them from that science?
Again, is the erroneous conclusion one constructed from premisses
opposite to the true premisses, or is it formal fallacy though drawn
from geometrical premisses? Or, perhaps, the erroneous conclusion
is due to the drawing of premisses from another science; e.g. in a
geometrical controversy a musical question is distinctively ungeometrical,
whereas the notion that parallels meet is in one sense geometrical,
being ungeometrical in a different fashion: the reason being that
'ungeometrical', like 'unrhythmical', is equivocal, meaning in the
one case not geometry at all, in the other bad geometry? It is this
error, i.e. error based on premisses of this kind-'of' the science
but false-that is the contrary of science. In mathematics the formal
fallacy is not so common, because it is the middle term in which the
ambiguity lies, since the major is predicated of the whole of the
middle and the middle of the whole of the minor (the predicate of
course never has the prefix 'all'); and in mathematics one can, so
to speak, see these middle terms with an intellectual vision, while
in dialectic the ambiguity may escape detection. E.g. 'Is every circle
a figure?' A diagram shows that this is so, but the minor premiss
'Are epics circles?' is shown by the diagram to be false.

If a proof has an inductive minor premiss, one should not bring an
'objection' against it. For since every premiss must be applicable
to a number of cases (otherwise it will not be true in every instance,
which, since the syllogism proceeds from universals, it must be),
then assuredly the same is true of an 'objection'; since premisses
and 'objections' are so far the same that anything which can be validly
advanced as an 'objection' must be such that it could take the form
of a premiss, either demonstrative or dialectical. On the other hand,
arguments formally illogical do sometimes occur through taking as
middles mere attributes of the major and minor terms. An instance
of this is Caeneus' proof that fire increases in geometrical proportion:
'Fire', he argues, 'increases rapidly, and so does geometrical proportion'.
There is no syllogism so, but there is a syllogism if the most rapidly
increasing proportion is geometrical and the most rapidly increasing
proportion is attributable to fire in its motion. Sometimes, no doubt,
it is impossible to reason from premisses predicating mere attributes:
but sometimes it is possible, though the possibility is overlooked.
If false premisses could never give true conclusions 'resolution'
would be easy, for premisses and conclusion would in that case inevitably
reciprocate. I might then argue thus: let A be an existing fact; let
the existence of A imply such and such facts actually known to me
to exist, which we may call B. I can now, since they reciprocate,
infer A from B. 

Reciprocation of premisses and conclusion is more frequent in mathematics,
because mathematics takes definitions, but never an accident, for
its premisses-a second characteristic distinguishing mathematical
reasoning from dialectical disputations. 

A science expands not by the interposition of fresh middle terms,
but by the apposition of fresh extreme terms. E.g. A is predicated
of B, B of C, C of D, and so indefinitely. Or the expansion may be
lateral: e.g. one major A, may be proved of two minors, C and E. Thus
let A represent number-a number or number taken indeterminately; B
determinate odd number; C any particular odd number. We can then predicate
A of C. Next let D represent determinate even number, and E even number.
Then A is predicable of E. 

Part 13

Knowledge of the fact differs from knowledge of the reasoned fact.
To begin with, they differ within the same science and in two ways:
(1) when the premisses of the syllogism are not immediate (for then
the proximate cause is not contained in them-a necessary condition
of knowledge of the reasoned fact): (2) when the premisses are immediate,
but instead of the cause the better known of the two reciprocals is
taken as the middle; for of two reciprocally predicable terms the
one which is not the cause may quite easily be the better known and
so become the middle term of the demonstration. Thus (2, a) you might
prove as follows that the planets are near because they do not twinkle:
let C be the planets, B not twinkling, A proximity. Then B is predicable
of C; for the planets do not twinkle. But A is also predicable of
B, since that which does not twinkle is near--we must take this truth
as having been reached by induction or sense-perception. Therefore
A is a necessary predicate of C; so that we have demonstrated that
the planets are near. This syllogism, then, proves not the reasoned
fact but only the fact; since they are not near because they do not
twinkle, but, because they are near, do not twinkle. The major and
middle of the proof, however, may be reversed, and then the demonstration
will be of the reasoned fact. Thus: let C be the planets, B proximity,
A not twinkling. Then B is an attribute of C, and A-not twinkling-of
B. Consequently A is predicable of C, and the syllogism proves the
reasoned fact, since its middle term is the proximate cause. Another
example is the inference that the moon is spherical from its manner
of waxing. Thus: since that which so waxes is spherical, and since
the moon so waxes, clearly the moon is spherical. Put in this form,
the syllogism turns out to be proof of the fact, but if the middle
and major be reversed it is proof of the reasoned fact; since the
moon is not spherical because it waxes in a certain manner, but waxes
in such a manner because it is spherical. (Let C be the moon, B spherical,
and A waxing.) Again (b), in cases where the cause and the effect
are not reciprocal and the effect is the better known, the fact is
demonstrated but not the reasoned fact. This also occurs (1) when
the middle falls outside the major and minor, for here too the strict
cause is not given, and so the demonstration is of the fact, not of
the reasoned fact. For example, the question 'Why does not a wall
breathe?' might be answered, 'Because it is not an animal'; but that
answer would not give the strict cause, because if not being an animal
causes the absence of respiration, then being an animal should be
the cause of respiration, according to the rule that if the negation
of causes the non-inherence of y, the affirmation of x causes the
inherence of y; e.g. if the disproportion of the hot and cold elements
is the cause of ill health, their proportion is the cause of health;
and conversely, if the assertion of x causes the inherence of y, the
negation of x must cause y's non-inherence. But in the case given
this consequence does not result; for not every animal breathes. A
syllogism with this kind of cause takes place in the second figure.
Thus: let A be animal, B respiration, C wall. Then A is predicable
of all B (for all that breathes is animal), but of no C; and consequently
B is predicable of no C; that is, the wall does not breathe. Such
causes are like far-fetched explanations, which precisely consist
in making the cause too remote, as in Anacharsis' account of why the
Scythians have no flute-players; namely because they have no vines.

Thus, then, do the syllogism of the fact and the syllogism of the
reasoned fact differ within one science and according to the position
of the middle terms. But there is another way too in which the fact
and the reasoned fact differ, and that is when they are investigated
respectively by different sciences. This occurs in the case of problems
related to one another as subordinate and superior, as when optical
problems are subordinated to geometry, mechanical problems to stereometry,
harmonic problems to arithmetic, the data of observation to astronomy.
(Some of these sciences bear almost the same name; e.g. mathematical
and nautical astronomy, mathematical and acoustical harmonics.) Here
it is the business of the empirical observers to know the fact, of
the mathematicians to know the reasoned fact; for the latter are in
possession of the demonstrations giving the causes, and are often
ignorant of the fact: just as we have often a clear insight into a
universal, but through lack of observation are ignorant of some of
its particular instances. These connexions have a perceptible existence
though they are manifestations of forms. For the mathematical sciences
concern forms: they do not demonstrate properties of a substratum,
since, even though the geometrical subjects are predicable as properties
of a perceptible substratum, it is not as thus predicable that the
mathematician demonstrates properties of them. As optics is related
to geometry, so another science is related to optics, namely the theory
of the rainbow. Here knowledge of the fact is within the province
of the natural philosopher, knowledge of the reasoned fact within
that of the optician, either qua optician or qua mathematical optician.
Many sciences not standing in this mutual relation enter into it at
points; e.g. medicine and geometry: it is the physician's business
to know that circular wounds heal more slowly, the geometer's to know
the reason why. 

Part 14

Of all the figures the most scientific is the first. Thus, it is the
vehicle of the demonstrations of all the mathematical sciences, such
as arithmetic, geometry, and optics, and practically all of all sciences
that investigate causes: for the syllogism of the reasoned fact is
either exclusively or generally speaking and in most cases in this
figure-a second proof that this figure is the most scientific; for
grasp of a reasoned conclusion is the primary condition of knowledge.
Thirdly, the first is the only figure which enables us to pursue knowledge
of the essence of a thing. In the second figure no affirmative conclusion
is possible, and knowledge of a thing's essence must be affirmative;
while in the third figure the conclusion can be affirmative, but cannot
be universal, and essence must have a universal character: e.g. man
is not two-footed animal in any qualified sense, but universally.
Finally, the first figure has no need of the others, while it is by
means of the first that the other two figures are developed, and have
their intervals closepacked until immediate premisses are reached.

Clearly, therefore, the first figure is the primary condition of knowledge.

Part 15

Just as an attribute A may (as we saw) be atomically connected with
a subject B, so its disconnexion may be atomic. I call 'atomic' connexions
or disconnexions which involve no intermediate term; since in that
case the connexion or disconnexion will not be mediated by something
other than the terms themselves. It follows that if either A or B,
or both A and B, have a genus, their disconnexion cannot be primary.
Thus: let C be the genus of A. Then, if C is not the genus of B-for
A may well have a genus which is not the genus of B-there will be
a syllogism proving A's disconnexion from B thus: 

all A is C, no B is C, therefore no B is A. Or if it is B which has
a genus D, we have 

all B is D, no D is A, therefore no B is A, by syllogism; and the
proof will be similar if both A and B have a genus. That the genus
of A need not be the genus of B and vice versa, is shown by the existence
of mutually exclusive coordinate series of predication. If no term
in the series ACD...is predicable of any term in the series BEF...,and
if G-a term in the former series-is the genus of A, clearly G will
not be the genus of B; since, if it were, the series would not be
mutually exclusive. So also if B has a genus, it will not be the genus
of A. If, on the other hand, neither A nor B has a genus and A does
not inhere in B, this disconnexion must be atomic. If there be a middle
term, one or other of them is bound to have a genus, for the syllogism
will be either in the first or the second figure. If it is in the
first, B will have a genus-for the premiss containing it must be affirmative:
if in the second, either A or B indifferently, since syllogism is
possible if either is contained in a negative premiss, but not if
both premisses are negative. 

Hence it is clear that one thing may be atomically disconnected from
another, and we have stated when and how this is possible.

Part 16

Ignorance-defined not as the negation of knowledge but as a positive
state of mind-is error produced by inference. 

(1) Let us first consider propositions asserting a predicate's immediate
connexion with or disconnexion from a subject. Here, it is true, positive
error may befall one in alternative ways; for it may arise where one
directly believes a connexion or disconnexion as well as where one's
belief is acquired by inference. The error, however, that consists
in a direct belief is without complication; but the error resulting
from inference-which here concerns us-takes many forms. Thus, let
A be atomically disconnected from all B: then the conclusion inferred
through a middle term C, that all B is A, will be a case of error
produced by syllogism. Now, two cases are possible. Either (a) both
premisses, or (b) one premiss only, may be false. (a) If neither A
is an attribute of any C nor C of any B, whereas the contrary was
posited in both cases, both premisses will be false. (C may quite
well be so related to A and B that C is neither subordinate to A nor
a universal attribute of B: for B, since A was said to be primarily
disconnected from B, cannot have a genus, and A need not necessarily
be a universal attribute of all things. Consequently both premisses
may be false.) On the other hand, (b) one of the premisses may be
true, though not either indifferently but only the major A-C since,
B having no genus, the premiss C-B will always be false, while A-C
may be true. This is the case if, for example, A is related atomically
to both C and B; because when the same term is related atomically
to more terms than one, neither of those terms will belong to the
other. It is, of course, equally the case if A-C is not atomic.

Error of attribution, then, occurs through these causes and in this
form only-for we found that no syllogism of universal attribution
was possible in any figure but the first. On the other hand, an error
of non-attribution may occur either in the first or in the second
figure. Let us therefore first explain the various forms it takes
in the first figure and the character of the premisses in each case.

(c) It may occur when both premisses are false; e.g. supposing A atomically
connected with both C and B, if it be then assumed that no C is and
all B is C, both premisses are false. 

(d) It is also possible when one is false. This may be either premiss
indifferently. A-C may be true, C-B false-A-C true because A is not
an attribute of all things, C-B false because C, which never has the
attribute A, cannot be an attribute of B; for if C-B were true, the
premiss A-C would no longer be true, and besides if both premisses
were true, the conclusion would be true. Or again, C-B may be true
and A-C false; e.g. if both C and A contain B as genera, one of them
must be subordinate to the other, so that if the premiss takes the
form No C is A, it will be false. This makes it clear that whether
either or both premisses are false, the conclusion will equally be
false. 

In the second figure the premisses cannot both be wholly false; for
if all B is A, no middle term can be with truth universally affirmed
of one extreme and universally denied of the other: but premisses
in which the middle is affirmed of one extreme and denied of the other
are the necessary condition if one is to get a valid inference at
all. Therefore if, taken in this way, they are wholly false, their
contraries conversely should be wholly true. But this is impossible.
On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent both premisses being
partially false; e.g. if actually some A is C and some B is C, then
if it is premised that all A is C and no B is C, both premisses are
false, yet partially, not wholly, false. The same is true if the major
is made negative instead of the minor. Or one premiss may be wholly
false, and it may be either of them. Thus, supposing that actually
an attribute of all A must also be an attribute of all B, then if
C is yet taken to be a universal attribute of all but universally
non-attributable to B, C-A will be true but C-B false. Again, actually
that which is an attribute of no B will not be an attribute of all
A either; for if it be an attribute of all A, it will also be an attribute
of all B, which is contrary to supposition; but if C be nevertheless
assumed to be a universal attribute of A, but an attribute of no B,
then the premiss C-B is true but the major is false. The case is similar
if the major is made the negative premiss. For in fact what is an
attribute of no A will not be an attribute of any B either; and if
it be yet assumed that C is universally non-attributable to A, but
a universal attribute of B, the premiss C-A is true but the minor
wholly false. Again, in fact it is false to assume that that which
is an attribute of all B is an attribute of no A, for if it be an
attribute of all B, it must be an attribute of some A. If then C is
nevertheless assumed to be an attribute of all B but of no A, C-B
will be true but C-A false. 

It is thus clear that in the case of atomic propositions erroneous
inference will be possible not only when both premisses are false
but also when only one is false. 

Part 17

In the case of attributes not atomically connected with or disconnected
from their subjects, (a, i) as long as the false conclusion is inferred
through the 'appropriate' middle, only the major and not both premisses
can be false. By 'appropriate middle' I mean the middle term through
which the contradictory-i.e. the true-conclusion is inferrible. Thus,
let A be attributable to B through a middle term C: then, since to
produce a conclusion the premiss C-B must be taken affirmatively,
it is clear that this premiss must always be true, for its quality
is not changed. But the major A-C is false, for it is by a change
in the quality of A-C that the conclusion becomes its contradictory-i.e.
true. Similarly (ii) if the middle is taken from another series of
predication; e.g. suppose D to be not only contained within A as a
part within its whole but also predicable of all B. Then the premiss
D-B must remain unchanged, but the quality of A-D must be changed;
so that D-B is always true, A-D always false. Such error is practically
identical with that which is inferred through the 'appropriate' middle.
On the other hand, (b) if the conclusion is not inferred through the
'appropriate' middle-(i) when the middle is subordinate to A but is
predicable of no B, both premisses must be false, because if there
is to be a conclusion both must be posited as asserting the contrary
of what is actually the fact, and so posited both become false: e.g.
suppose that actually all D is A but no B is D; then if these premisses
are changed in quality, a conclusion will follow and both of the new
premisses will be false. When, however, (ii) the middle D is not subordinate
to A, A-D will be true, D-B false-A-D true because A was not subordinate
to D, D-B false because if it had been true, the conclusion too would
have been true; but it is ex hypothesi false. 

When the erroneous inference is in the second figure, both premisses
cannot be entirely false; since if B is subordinate to A, there can
be no middle predicable of all of one extreme and of none of the other,
as was stated before. One premiss, however, may be false, and it may
be either of them. Thus, if C is actually an attribute of both A and
B, but is assumed to be an attribute of A only and not of B, C-A will
be true, C-B false: or again if C be assumed to be attributable to
B but to no A, C-B will be true, C-A false. 

We have stated when and through what kinds of premisses error will
result in cases where the erroneous conclusion is negative. If the
conclusion is affirmative, (a, i) it may be inferred through the
'appropriate' middle term. In this case both premisses cannot be false
since, as we said before, C-B must remain unchanged if there is to
be a conclusion, and consequently A-C, the quality of which is changed,
will always be false. This is equally true if (ii) the middle is taken
from another series of predication, as was stated to be the case also
with regard to negative error; for D-B must remain unchanged, while
the quality of A-D must be converted, and the type of error is the
same as before. 

(b) The middle may be inappropriate. Then (i) if D is subordinate
to A, A-D will be true, but D-B false; since A may quite well be predicable
of several terms no one of which can be subordinated to another. If,
however, (ii) D is not subordinate to A, obviously A-D, since it is
affirmed, will always be false, while D-B may be either true or false;
for A may very well be an attribute of no D, whereas all B is D, e.g.
no science is animal, all music is science. Equally well A may be
an attribute of no D, and D of no B. It emerges, then, that if the
middle term is not subordinate to the major, not only both premisses
but either singly may be false. 

Thus we have made it clear how many varieties of erroneous inference
are liable to happen and through what kinds of premisses they occur,
in the case both of immediate and of demonstrable truths.

Part 18

It is also clear that the loss of any one of the senses entails the
loss of a corresponding portion of knowledge, and that, since we learn
either by induction or by demonstration, this knowledge cannot be
acquired. Thus demonstration develops from universals, induction from
particulars; but since it is possible to familiarize the pupil with
even the so-called mathematical abstractions only through induction-i.e.
only because each subject genus possesses, in virtue of a determinate
mathematical character, certain properties which can be treated as
separate even though they do not exist in isolation-it is consequently
impossible to come to grasp universals except through induction. But
induction is impossible for those who have not sense-perception. For
it is sense-perception alone which is adequate for grasping the particulars:
they cannot be objects of scientific knowledge, because neither can
universals give us knowledge of them without induction, nor can we
get it through induction without sense-perception. 

Part 19

Every syllogism is effected by means of three terms. One kind of syllogism
serves to prove that A inheres in C by showing that A inheres in B
and B in C; the other is negative and one of its premisses asserts
one term of another, while the other denies one term of another. It
is clear, then, that these are the fundamentals and so-called hypotheses
of syllogism. Assume them as they have been stated, and proof is bound
to follow-proof that A inheres in C through B, and again that A inheres
in B through some other middle term, and similarly that B inheres
in C. If our reasoning aims at gaining credence and so is merely dialectical,
it is obvious that we have only to see that our inference is based
on premisses as credible as possible: so that if a middle term between
A and B is credible though not real, one can reason through it and
complete a dialectical syllogism. If, however, one is aiming at truth,
one must be guided by the real connexions of subjects and attributes.
Thus: since there are attributes which are predicated of a subject
essentially or naturally and not coincidentally-not, that is, in the
sense in which we say 'That white (thing) is a man', which is not
the same mode of predication as when we say 'The man is white': the
man is white not because he is something else but because he is man,
but the white is man because 'being white' coincides with 'humanity'
within one substratum-therefore there are terms such as are naturally
subjects of predicates. Suppose, then, C such a term not itself attributable
to anything else as to a subject, but the proximate subject of the
attribute B--i.e. so that B-C is immediate; suppose further E related
immediately to F, and F to B. The first question is, must this series
terminate, or can it proceed to infinity? The second question is as
follows: Suppose nothing is essentially predicated of A, but A is
predicated primarily of H and of no intermediate prior term, and suppose
H similarly related to G and G to B; then must this series also terminate,
or can it too proceed to infinity? There is this much difference between
the questions: the first is, is it possible to start from that which
is not itself attributable to anything else but is the subject of
attributes, and ascend to infinity? The second is the problem whether
one can start from that which is a predicate but not itself a subject
of predicates, and descend to infinity? A third question is, if the
extreme terms are fixed, can there be an infinity of middles? I mean
this: suppose for example that A inheres in C and B is intermediate
between them, but between B and A there are other middles, and between
these again fresh middles; can these proceed to infinity or can they
not? This is the equivalent of inquiring, do demonstrations proceed
to infinity, i.e. is everything demonstrable? Or do ultimate subject
and primary attribute limit one another? 

I hold that the same questions arise with regard to negative conclusions
and premisses: viz. if A is attributable to no B, then either this
predication will be primary, or there will be an intermediate term
prior to B to which a is not attributable-G, let us say, which is
attributable to all B-and there may still be another term H prior
to G, which is attributable to all G. The same questions arise, I
say, because in these cases too either the series of prior terms to
which a is not attributable is infinite or it terminates.

One cannot ask the same questions in the case of reciprocating terms,
since when subject and predicate are convertible there is neither
primary nor ultimate subject, seeing that all the reciprocals qua
subjects stand in the same relation to one another, whether we say
that the subject has an infinity of attributes or that both subjects
and attributes-and we raised the question in both cases-are infinite
in number. These questions then cannot be asked-unless, indeed, the
terms can reciprocate by two different modes, by accidental predication
in one relation and natural predication in the other. 

Part 20

Now, it is clear that if the predications terminate in both the upward
and the downward direction (by 'upward' I mean the ascent to the more
universal, by 'downward' the descent to the more particular), the
middle terms cannot be infinite in number. For suppose that A is predicated
of F, and that the intermediates-call them BB'B"...-are infinite,
then clearly you might descend from and find one term predicated of
another ad infinitum, since you have an infinity of terms between
you and F; and equally, if you ascend from F, there are infinite terms
between you and A. It follows that if these processes are impossible
there cannot be an infinity of intermediates between A and F. Nor
is it of any effect to urge that some terms of the series AB...F are
contiguous so as to exclude intermediates, while others cannot be
taken into the argument at all: whichever terms of the series B...I
take, the number of intermediates in the direction either of A or
of F must be finite or infinite: where the infinite series starts,
whether from the first term or from a later one, is of no moment,
for the succeeding terms in any case are infinite in number.

Part 21

Further, if in affirmative demonstration the series terminates in
both directions, clearly it will terminate too in negative demonstration.
Let us assume that we cannot proceed to infinity either by ascending
from the ultimate term (by 'ultimate term' I mean a term such as was,
not itself attributable to a subject but itself the subject of attributes),
or by descending towards an ultimate from the primary term (by 'primary
term' I mean a term predicable of a subject but not itself a subject).
If this assumption is justified, the series will also terminate in
the case of negation. For a negative conclusion can be proved in all
three figures. In the first figure it is proved thus: no B is A, all
C is B. In packing the interval B-C we must reach immediate propositions--as
is always the case with the minor premiss--since B-C is affirmative.
As regards the other premiss it is plain that if the major term is
denied of a term D prior to B, D will have to be predicable of all
B, and if the major is denied of yet another term prior to D, this
term must be predicable of all D. Consequently, since the ascending
series is finite, the descent will also terminate and there will be
a subject of which A is primarily non-predicable. In the second figure
the syllogism is, all A is B, no C is B,..no C is A. If proof of this
is required, plainly it may be shown either in the first figure as
above, in the second as here, or in the third. The first figure has
been discussed, and we will proceed to display the second, proof by
which will be as follows: all B is D, no C is D..., since it is required
that B should be a subject of which a predicate is affirmed. Next,
since D is to be proved not to belong to C, then D has a further predicate
which is denied of C. Therefore, since the succession of predicates
affirmed of an ever higher universal terminates, the succession of
predicates denied terminates too. 

The third figure shows it as follows: all B is A, some B is not C.
Therefore some A is not C. This premiss, i.e. C-B, will be proved
either in the same figure or in one of the two figures discussed above.
In the first and second figures the series terminates. If we use the
third figure, we shall take as premisses, all E is B, some E is not
C, and this premiss again will be proved by a similar prosyllogism.
But since it is assumed that the series of descending subjects also
terminates, plainly the series of more universal non-predicables will
terminate also. Even supposing that the proof is not confined to one
method, but employs them all and is now in the first figure, now in
the second or third-even so the regress will terminate, for the methods
are finite in number, and if finite things are combined in a finite
number of ways, the result must be finite. 

Thus it is plain that the regress of middles terminates in the case
of negative demonstration, if it does so also in the case of affirmative
demonstration. That in fact the regress terminates in both these cases
may be made clear by the following dialectical considerations.

Part 22

In the case of predicates constituting the essential nature of a thing,
it clearly terminates, seeing that if definition is possible, or in
other words, if essential form is knowable, and an infinite series
cannot be traversed, predicates constituting a thing's essential nature
must be finite in number. But as regards predicates generally we have
the following prefatory remarks to make. (1) We can affirm without
falsehood 'the white (thing) is walking', and that big (thing) is
a log'; or again, 'the log is big', and 'the man walks'. But the affirmation
differs in the two cases. When I affirm 'the white is a log', I mean
that something which happens to be white is a log-not that white is
the substratum in which log inheres, for it was not qua white or qua
a species of white that the white (thing) came to be a log, and the
white (thing) is consequently not a log except incidentally. On the
other hand, when I affirm 'the log is white', I do not mean that something
else, which happens also to be a log, is white (as I should if I said
'the musician is white,' which would mean 'the man who happens also
to be a musician is white'); on the contrary, log is here the substratum-the
substratum which actually came to be white, and did so qua wood or
qua a species of wood and qua nothing else. 

If we must lay down a rule, let us entitle the latter kind of statement
predication, and the former not predication at all, or not strict
but accidental predication. 'White' and 'log' will thus serve as types
respectively of predicate and subject. 

We shall assume, then, that the predicate is invariably predicated
strictly and not accidentally of the subject, for on such predication
demonstrations depend for their force. It follows from this that when
a single attribute is predicated of a single subject, the predicate
must affirm of the subject either some element constituting its essential
nature, or that it is in some way qualified, quantified, essentially
related, active, passive, placed, or dated. 

(2) Predicates which signify substance signify that the subject is
identical with the predicate or with a species of the predicate. Predicates
not signifying substance which are predicated of a subject not identical
with themselves or with a species of themselves are accidental or
coincidental; e.g. white is a coincident of man, seeing that man is
not identical with white or a species of white, but rather with animal,
since man is identical with a species of animal. These predicates
which do not signify substance must be predicates of some other subject,
and nothing can be white which is not also other than white. The Forms
we can dispense with, for they are mere sound without sense; and even
if there are such things, they are not relevant to our discussion,
since demonstrations are concerned with predicates such as we have
defined. 

(3) If A is a quality of B, B cannot be a quality of A-a quality of
a quality. Therefore A and B cannot be predicated reciprocally of
one another in strict predication: they can be affirmed without falsehood
of one another, but not genuinely predicated of each other. For one
alternative is that they should be substantially predicated of one
another, i.e. B would become the genus or differentia of A-the predicate
now become subject. But it has been shown that in these substantial
predications neither the ascending predicates nor the descending subjects
form an infinite series; e.g. neither the series, man is biped, biped
is animal, &c., nor the series predicating animal of man, man of Callias,
Callias of a further. subject as an element of its essential nature,
is infinite. For all such substance is definable, and an infinite
series cannot be traversed in thought: consequently neither the ascent
nor the descent is infinite, since a substance whose predicates were
infinite would not be definable. Hence they will not be predicated
each as the genus of the other; for this would equate a genus with
one of its own species. Nor (the other alternative) can a quale be
reciprocally predicated of a quale, nor any term belonging to an adjectival
category of another such term, except by accidental predication; for
all such predicates are coincidents and are predicated of substances.
On the other hand-in proof of the impossibility of an infinite ascending
series-every predication displays the subject as somehow qualified
or quantified or as characterized under one of the other adjectival
categories, or else is an element in its substantial nature: these
latter are limited in number, and the number of the widest kinds under
which predications fall is also limited, for every predication must
exhibit its subject as somehow qualified, quantified, essentially
related, acting or suffering, or in some place or at some time.

I assume first that predication implies a single subject and a single
attribute, and secondly that predicates which are not substantial
are not predicated of one another. We assume this because such predicates
are all coincidents, and though some are essential coincidents, others
of a different type, yet we maintain that all of them alike are predicated
of some substratum and that a coincident is never a substratum-since
we do not class as a coincident anything which does not owe its designation
to its being something other than itself, but always hold that any
coincident is predicated of some substratum other than itself, and
that another group of coincidents may have a different substratum.
Subject to these assumptions then, neither the ascending nor the descending
series of predication in which a single attribute is predicated of
a single subject is infinite. For the subjects of which coincidents
are predicated are as many as the constitutive elements of each individual
substance, and these we have seen are not infinite in number, while
in the ascending series are contained those constitutive elements
with their coincidents-both of which are finite. We conclude that
there is a given subject (D) of which some attribute (C) is primarily
predicable; that there must be an attribute (B) primarily predicable
of the first attribute, and that the series must end with a term (A)
not predicable of any term prior to the last subject of which it was
predicated (B), and of which no term prior to it is predicable.

The argument we have given is one of the so-called proofs; an alternative
proof follows. Predicates so related to their subjects that there
are other predicates prior to them predicable of those subjects are
demonstrable; but of demonstrable propositions one cannot have something
better than knowledge, nor can one know them without demonstration.
Secondly, if a consequent is only known through an antecedent (viz.
premisses prior to it) and we neither know this antecedent nor have
something better than knowledge of it, then we shall not have scientific
knowledge of the consequent. Therefore, if it is possible through
demonstration to know anything without qualification and not merely
as dependent on the acceptance of certain premisses-i.e. hypothetically-the
series of intermediate predications must terminate. If it does not
terminate, and beyond any predicate taken as higher than another there
remains another still higher, then every predicate is demonstrable.
Consequently, since these demonstrable predicates are infinite in
number and therefore cannot be traversed, we shall not know them by
demonstration. If, therefore, we have not something better than knowledge
of them, we cannot through demonstration have unqualified but only
hypothetical science of anything. 

As dialectical proofs of our contention these may carry conviction,
but an analytic process will show more briefly that neither the ascent
nor the descent of predication can be infinite in the demonstrative
sciences which are the object of our investigation. Demonstration
proves the inherence of essential attributes in things. Now attributes
may be essential for two reasons: either because they are elements
in the essential nature of their subjects, or because their subjects
are elements in their essential nature. An example of the latter is
odd as an attribute of number-though it is number's attribute, yet
number itself is an element in the definition of odd; of the former,
multiplicity or the indivisible, which are elements in the definition
of number. In neither kind of attribution can the terms be infinite.
They are not infinite where each is related to the term below it as
odd is to number, for this would mean the inherence in odd of another
attribute of odd in whose nature odd was an essential element: but
then number will be an ultimate subject of the whole infinite chain
of attributes, and be an element in the definition of each of them.
Hence, since an infinity of attributes such as contain their subject
in their definition cannot inhere in a single thing, the ascending
series is equally finite. Note, moreover, that all such attributes
must so inhere in the ultimate subject-e.g. its attributes in number
and number in them-as to be commensurate with the subject and not
of wider extent. Attributes which are essential elements in the nature
of their subjects are equally finite: otherwise definition would be
impossible. Hence, if all the attributes predicated are essential
and these cannot be infinite, the ascending series will terminate,
and consequently the descending series too. 

If this is so, it follows that the intermediates between any two terms
are also always limited in number. An immediately obvious consequence
of this is that demonstrations necessarily involve basic truths, and
that the contention of some-referred to at the outset-that all truths
are demonstrable is mistaken. For if there are basic truths, (a) not
all truths are demonstrable, and (b) an infinite regress is impossible;
since if either (a) or (b) were not a fact, it would mean that no
interval was immediate and indivisible, but that all intervals were
divisible. This is true because a conclusion is demonstrated by the
interposition, not the apposition, of a fresh term. If such interposition
could continue to infinity there might be an infinite number of terms
between any two terms; but this is impossible if both the ascending
and descending series of predication terminate; and of this fact,
which before was shown dialectically, analytic proof has now been
given. 

Part 23

It is an evident corollary of these conclusions that if the same attribute
A inheres in two terms C and D predicable either not at all, or not
of all instances, of one another, it does not always belong to them
in virtue of a common middle term. Isosceles and scalene possess the
attribute of having their angles equal to two right angles in virtue
of a common middle; for they possess it in so far as they are both
a certain kind of figure, and not in so far as they differ from one
another. But this is not always the case: for, were it so, if we take
B as the common middle in virtue of which A inheres in C and D, clearly
B would inhere in C and D through a second common middle, and this
in turn would inhere in C and D through a third, so that between two
terms an infinity of intermediates would fall-an impossibility. Thus
it need not always be in virtue of a common middle term that a single
attribute inheres in several subjects, since there must be immediate
intervals. Yet if the attribute to be proved common to two subjects
is to be one of their essential attributes, the middle terms involved
must be within one subject genus and be derived from the same group
of immediate premisses; for we have seen that processes of proof cannot
pass from one genus to another. 

It is also clear that when A inheres in B, this can be demonstrated
if there is a middle term. Further, the 'elements' of such a conclusion
are the premisses containing the middle in question, and they are
identical in number with the middle terms, seeing that the immediate
propositions-or at least such immediate propositions as are universal-are
the 'elements'. If, on the other hand, there is no middle term, demonstration
ceases to be possible: we are on the way to the basic truths. Similarly
if A does not inhere in B, this can be demonstrated if there is a
middle term or a term prior to B in which A does not inhere: otherwise
there is no demonstration and a basic truth is reached. There are,
moreover, as many 'elements' of the demonstrated conclusion as there
are middle terms, since it is propositions containing these middle
terms that are the basic premisses on which the demonstration rests;
and as there are some indemonstrable basic truths asserting that 'this
is that' or that 'this inheres in that', so there are others denying
that 'this is that' or that 'this inheres in that'-in fact some basic
truths will affirm and some will deny being. 

When we are to prove a conclusion, we must take a primary essential
predicate-suppose it C-of the subject B, and then suppose A similarly
predicable of C. If we proceed in this manner, no proposition or attribute
which falls beyond A is admitted in the proof: the interval is constantly
condensed until subject and predicate become indivisible, i.e. one.
We have our unit when the premiss becomes immediate, since the immediate
premiss alone is a single premiss in the unqualified sense of 'single'.
And as in other spheres the basic element is simple but not identical
in all-in a system of weight it is the mina, in music the quarter-tone,
and so on--so in syllogism the unit is an immediate premiss, and in
the knowledge that demonstration gives it is an intuition. In syllogisms,
then, which prove the inherence of an attribute, nothing falls outside
the major term. In the case of negative syllogisms on the other hand,
(1) in the first figure nothing falls outside the major term whose
inherence is in question; e.g. to prove through a middle C that A
does not inhere in B the premisses required are, all B is C, no C
is A. Then if it has to be proved that no C is A, a middle must be
found between and C; and this procedure will never vary.

(2) If we have to show that E is not D by means of the premisses,
all D is C; no E, or not all E, is C; then the middle will never fall
beyond E, and E is the subject of which D is to be denied in the conclusion.

(3) In the third figure the middle will never fall beyond the limits
of the subject and the attribute denied of it. 

Part 24

Since demonstrations may be either commensurately universal or particular,
and either affirmative or negative; the question arises, which form
is the better? And the same question may be put in regard to so-called
'direct' demonstration and reductio ad impossibile. Let us first examine
the commensurately universal and the particular forms, and when we
have cleared up this problem proceed to discuss 'direct' demonstration
and reductio ad impossibile. 

The following considerations might lead some minds to prefer particular
demonstration. 

(1) The superior demonstration is the demonstration which gives us
greater knowledge (for this is the ideal of demonstration), and we
have greater knowledge of a particular individual when we know it
in itself than when we know it through something else; e.g. we know
Coriscus the musician better when we know that Coriscus is musical
than when we know only that man is musical, and a like argument holds
in all other cases. But commensurately universal demonstration, instead
of proving that the subject itself actually is x, proves only that
something else is x- e.g. in attempting to prove that isosceles is
x, it proves not that isosceles but only that triangle is x- whereas
particular demonstration proves that the subject itself is x. The
demonstration, then, that a subject, as such, possesses an attribute
is superior. If this is so, and if the particular rather than the
commensurately universal forms demonstrates, particular demonstration
is superior. 

(2) The universal has not a separate being over against groups of
singulars. Demonstration nevertheless creates the opinion that its
function is conditioned by something like this-some separate entity
belonging to the real world; that, for instance, of triangle or of
figure or number, over against particular triangles, figures, and
numbers. But demonstration which touches the real and will not mislead
is superior to that which moves among unrealities and is delusory.
Now commensurately universal demonstration is of the latter kind:
if we engage in it we find ourselves reasoning after a fashion well
illustrated by the argument that the proportionate is what answers
to the definition of some entity which is neither line, number, solid,
nor plane, but a proportionate apart from all these. Since, then,
such a proof is characteristically commensurate and universal, and
less touches reality than does particular demonstration, and creates
a false opinion, it will follow that commensurate and universal is
inferior to particular demonstration. 

We may retort thus. (1) The first argument applies no more to commensurate
and universal than to particular demonstration. If equality to two
right angles is attributable to its subject not qua isosceles but
qua triangle, he who knows that isosceles possesses that attribute
knows the subject as qua itself possessing the attribute, to a less
degree than he who knows that triangle has that attribute. To sum
up the whole matter: if a subject is proved to possess qua triangle
an attribute which it does not in fact possess qua triangle, that
is not demonstration: but if it does possess it qua triangle the rule
applies that the greater knowledge is his who knows the subject as
possessing its attribute qua that in virtue of which it actually does
possess it. Since, then, triangle is the wider term, and there is
one identical definition of triangle-i.e. the term is not equivocal-and
since equality to two right angles belongs to all triangles, it is
isosceles qua triangle and not triangle qua isosceles which has its
angles so related. It follows that he who knows a connexion universally
has greater knowledge of it as it in fact is than he who knows the
particular; and the inference is that commensurate and universal is
superior to particular demonstration. 

(2) If there is a single identical definition i.e. if the commensurate
universal is unequivocal-then the universal will possess being not
less but more than some of the particulars, inasmuch as it is universals
which comprise the imperishable, particulars that tend to perish.

(3) Because the universal has a single meaning, we are not therefore
compelled to suppose that in these examples it has being as a substance
apart from its particulars-any more than we need make a similar supposition
in the other cases of unequivocal universal predication, viz. where
the predicate signifies not substance but quality, essential relatedness,
or action. If such a supposition is entertained, the blame rests not
with the demonstration but with the hearer. 

(4) Demonstration is syllogism that proves the cause, i.e. the reasoned
fact, and it is rather the commensurate universal than the particular
which is causative (as may be shown thus: that which possesses an
attribute through its own essential nature is itself the cause of
the inherence, and the commensurate universal is primary; hence the
commensurate universal is the cause). Consequently commensurately
universal demonstration is superior as more especially proving the
cause, that is the reasoned fact. 

(5) Our search for the reason ceases, and we think that we know, when
the coming to be or existence of the fact before us is not due to
the coming to be or existence of some other fact, for the last step
of a search thus conducted is eo ipso the end and limit of the problem.
Thus: 'Why did he come?' 'To get the money-wherewith to pay a debt-that
he might thereby do what was right.' When in this regress we can no
longer find an efficient or final cause, we regard the last step of
it as the end of the coming-or being or coming to be-and we regard
ourselves as then only having full knowledge of the reason why he
came. 

If, then, all causes and reasons are alike in this respect, and if
this is the means to full knowledge in the case of final causes such
as we have exemplified, it follows that in the case of the other causes
also full knowledge is attained when an attribute no longer inheres
because of something else. Thus, when we learn that exterior angles
are equal to four right angles because they are the exterior angles
of an isosceles, there still remains the question 'Why has isosceles
this attribute?' and its answer 'Because it is a triangle, and a triangle
has it because a triangle is a rectilinear figure.' If rectilinear
figure possesses the property for no further reason, at this point
we have full knowledge-but at this point our knowledge has become
commensurately universal, and so we conclude that commensurately universal
demonstration is superior. 

(6) The more demonstration becomes particular the more it sinks into
an indeterminate manifold, while universal demonstration tends to
the simple and determinate. But objects so far as they are an indeterminate
manifold are unintelligible, so far as they are determinate, intelligible:
they are therefore intelligible rather in so far as they are universal
than in so far as they are particular. From this it follows that universals
are more demonstrable: but since relative and correlative increase
concomitantly, of the more demonstrable there will be fuller demonstration.
Hence the commensurate and universal form, being more truly demonstration,
is the superior. 

(7) Demonstration which teaches two things is preferable to demonstration
which teaches only one. He who possesses commensurately universal
demonstration knows the particular as well, but he who possesses particular
demonstration does not know the universal. So that this is an additional
reason for preferring commensurately universal demonstration. And
there is yet this further argument: 

(8) Proof becomes more and more proof of the commensurate universal
as its middle term approaches nearer to the basic truth, and nothing
is so near as the immediate premiss which is itself the basic truth.
If, then, proof from the basic truth is more accurate than proof not
so derived, demonstration which depends more closely on it is more
accurate than demonstration which is less closely dependent. But commensurately
universal demonstration is characterized by this closer dependence,
and is therefore superior. Thus, if A had to be proved to inhere in
D, and the middles were B and C, B being the higher term would render
the demonstration which it mediated the more universal. 

Some of these arguments, however, are dialectical. The clearest indication
of the precedence of commensurately universal demonstration is as
follows: if of two propositions, a prior and a posterior, we have
a grasp of the prior, we have a kind of knowledge-a potential grasp-of
the posterior as well. For example, if one knows that the angles of
all triangles are equal to two right angles, one knows in a sense-potentially-that
the isosceles' angles also are equal to two right angles, even if
one does not know that the isosceles is a triangle; but to grasp this
posterior proposition is by no means to know the commensurate universal
either potentially or actually. Moreover, commensurately universal
demonstration is through and through intelligible; particular demonstration
issues in sense-perception. 

Part 25

The preceding arguments constitute our defence of the superiority
of commensurately universal to particular demonstration. That affirmative
demonstration excels negative may be shown as follows. 

(1) We may assume the superiority ceteris paribus of the demonstration
which derives from fewer postulates or hypotheses-in short from fewer
premisses; for, given that all these are equally well known, where
they are fewer knowledge will be more speedily acquired, and that
is a desideratum. The argument implied in our contention that demonstration
from fewer assumptions is superior may be set out in universal form
as follows. Assuming that in both cases alike the middle terms are
known, and that middles which are prior are better known than such
as are posterior, we may suppose two demonstrations of the inherence
of A in E, the one proving it through the middles B, C and D, the
other through F and G. Then A-D is known to the same degree as A-E
(in the second proof), but A-D is better known than and prior to A-E
(in the first proof); since A-E is proved through A-D, and the ground
is more certain than the conclusion. 

Hence demonstration by fewer premisses is ceteris paribus superior.
Now both affirmative and negative demonstration operate through three
terms and two premisses, but whereas the former assumes only that
something is, the latter assumes both that something is and that something
else is not, and thus operating through more kinds of premiss is inferior.

(2) It has been proved that no conclusion follows if both premisses
are negative, but that one must be negative, the other affirmative.
So we are compelled to lay down the following additional rule: as
the demonstration expands, the affirmative premisses must increase
in number, but there cannot be more than one negative premiss in each
complete proof. Thus, suppose no B is A, and all C is B. Then if both
the premisses are to be again expanded, a middle must be interposed.
Let us interpose D between A and B, and E between B and C. Then clearly
E is affirmatively related to B and C, while D is affirmatively related
to B but negatively to A; for all B is D, but there must be no D which
is A. Thus there proves to be a single negative premiss, A-D. In the
further prosyllogisms too it is the same, because in the terms of
an affirmative syllogism the middle is always related affirmatively
to both extremes; in a negative syllogism it must be negatively related
only to one of them, and so this negation comes to be a single negative
premiss, the other premisses being affirmative. If, then, that through
which a truth is proved is a better known and more certain truth,
and if the negative proposition is proved through the affirmative
and not vice versa, affirmative demonstration, being prior and better
known and more certain, will be superior. 

(3) The basic truth of demonstrative syllogism is the universal immediate
premiss, and the universal premiss asserts in affirmative demonstration
and in negative denies: and the affirmative proposition is prior to
and better known than the negative (since affirmation explains denial
and is prior to denial, just as being is prior to not-being). It follows
that the basic premiss of affirmative demonstration is superior to
that of negative demonstration, and the demonstration which uses superior
basic premisses is superior. 

(4) Affirmative demonstration is more of the nature of a basic form
of proof, because it is a sine qua non of negative demonstration.

Part 26

Since affirmative demonstration is superior to negative, it is clearly
superior also to reductio ad impossibile. We must first make certain
what is the difference between negative demonstration and reductio
ad impossibile. Let us suppose that no B is A, and that all C is B:
the conclusion necessarily follows that no C is A. If these premisses
are assumed, therefore, the negative demonstration that no C is A
is direct. Reductio ad impossibile, on the other hand, proceeds as
follows. Supposing we are to prove that does not inhere in B, we have
to assume that it does inhere, and further that B inheres in C, with
the resulting inference that A inheres in C. This we have to suppose
a known and admitted impossibility; and we then infer that A cannot
inhere in B. Thus if the inherence of B in C is not questioned, A's
inherence in B is impossible. 

The order of the terms is the same in both proofs: they differ according
to which of the negative propositions is the better known, the one
denying A of B or the one denying A of C. When the falsity of the
conclusion is the better known, we use reductio ad impossible; when
the major premiss of the syllogism is the more obvious, we use direct
demonstration. All the same the proposition denying A of B is, in
the order of being, prior to that denying A of C; for premisses are
prior to the conclusion which follows from them, and 'no C is A' is
the conclusion, 'no B is A' one of its premisses. For the destructive
result of reductio ad impossibile is not a proper conclusion, nor
are its antecedents proper premisses. On the contrary: the constituents
of syllogism are premisses related to one another as whole to part
or part to whole, whereas the premisses A-C and A-B are not thus related
to one another. Now the superior demonstration is that which proceeds
from better known and prior premisses, and while both these forms
depend for credence on the not-being of something, yet the source
of the one is prior to that of the other. Therefore negative demonstration
will have an unqualified superiority to reductio ad impossibile, and
affirmative demonstration, being superior to negative, will consequently
be superior also to reductio ad impossibile. 

Part 27

The science which is knowledge at once of the fact and of the reasoned
fact, not of the fact by itself without the reasoned fact, is the
more exact and the prior science. 

A science such as arithmetic, which is not a science of properties
qua inhering in a substratum, is more exact than and prior to a science
like harmonics, which is a science of pr,operties inhering in a substratum;
and similarly a science like arithmetic, which is constituted of fewer
basic elements, is more exact than and prior to geometry, which requires
additional elements. What I mean by 'additional elements' is this:
a unit is substance without position, while a point is substance with
position; the latter contains an additional element. 

Part 28

A single science is one whose domain is a single genus, viz. all the
subjects constituted out of the primary entities of the genus-i.e.
the parts of this total subject-and their essential properties.

One science differs from another when their basic truths have neither
a common source nor are derived those of the one science from those
the other. This is verified when we reach the indemonstrable premisses
of a science, for they must be within one genus with its conclusions:
and this again is verified if the conclusions proved by means of them
fall within one genus-i.e. are homogeneous. 

Part 29

One can have several demonstrations of the same connexion not only
by taking from the same series of predication middles which are other
than the immediately cohering term e.g. by taking C, D, and F severally
to prove A-B--but also by taking a middle from another series. Thus
let A be change, D alteration of a property, B feeling pleasure, and
G relaxation. We can then without falsehood predicate D of B and A
of D, for he who is pleased suffers alteration of a property, and
that which alters a property changes. Again, we can predicate A of
G without falsehood, and G of B; for to feel pleasure is to relax,
and to relax is to change. So the conclusion can be drawn through
middles which are different, i.e. not in the same series-yet not so
that neither of these middles is predicable of the other, for they
must both be attributable to some one subject. 

A further point worth investigating is how many ways of proving the
same conclusion can be obtained by varying the figure, 

Part 30

There is no knowledge by demonstration of chance conjunctions; for
chance conjunctions exist neither by necessity nor as general connexions
but comprise what comes to be as something distinct from these. Now
demonstration is concerned only with one or other of these two; for
all reasoning proceeds from necessary or general premisses, the conclusion
being necessary if the premisses are necessary and general if the
premisses are general. Consequently, if chance conjunctions are neither
general nor necessary, they are not demonstrable. 

Part 31

Scientific knowledge is not possible through the act of perception.
Even if perception as a faculty is of 'the such' and not merely of
a 'this somewhat', yet one must at any rate actually perceive a 'this
somewhat', and at a definite present place and time: but that which
is commensurately universal and true in all cases one cannot perceive,
since it is not 'this' and it is not 'now'; if it were, it would not
be commensurately universal-the term we apply to what is always and
everywhere. Seeing, therefore, that demonstrations are commensurately
universal and universals imperceptible, we clearly cannot obtain scientific
knowledge by the act of perception: nay, it is obvious that even if
it were possible to perceive that a triangle has its angles equal
to two right angles, we should still be looking for a demonstration-we
should not (as some say) possess knowledge of it; for perception must
be of a particular, whereas scientific knowledge involves the recognition
of the commensurate universal. So if we were on the moon, and saw
the earth shutting out the sun's light, we should not know the cause
of the eclipse: we should perceive the present fact of the eclipse,
but not the reasoned fact at all, since the act of perception is not
of the commensurate universal. I do not, of course, deny that by watching
the frequent recurrence of this event we might, after tracking the
commensurate universal, possess a demonstration, for the commensurate
universal is elicited from the several groups of singulars.

The commensurate universal is precious because it makes clear the
cause; so that in the case of facts like these which have a cause
other than themselves universal knowledge is more precious than sense-perceptions
and than intuition. (As regards primary truths there is of course
a different account to be given.) Hence it is clear that knowledge
of things demonstrable cannot be acquired by perception, unless the
term perception is applied to the possession of scientific knowledge
through demonstration. Nevertheless certain points do arise with regard
to connexions to be proved which are referred for their explanation
to a failure in sense-perception: there are cases when an act of vision
would terminate our inquiry, not because in seeing we should be knowing,
but because we should have elicited the universal from seeing; if,
for example, we saw the pores in the glass and the light passing through,
the reason of the kindling would be clear to us because we should
at the same time see it in each instance and intuit that it must be
so in all instances. 

Part 32

All syllogisms cannot have the same basic truths. This may be shown
first of all by the following dialectical considerations. (1) Some
syllogisms are true and some false: for though a true inference is
possible from false premisses, yet this occurs once only-I mean if
A for instance, is truly predicable of C, but B, the middle, is false,
both A-B and B-C being false; nevertheless, if middles are taken to
prove these premisses, they will be false because every conclusion
which is a falsehood has false premisses, while true conclusions have
true premisses, and false and true differ in kind. Then again, (2)
falsehoods are not all derived from a single identical set of principles:
there are falsehoods which are the contraries of one another and cannot
coexist, e.g. 'justice is injustice', and 'justice is cowardice';
'man is horse', and 'man is ox'; 'the equal is greater', and 'the
equal is less.' From established principles we may argue the case
as follows, confining-ourselves therefore to true conclusions. Not
even all these are inferred from the same basic truths; many of them
in fact have basic truths which differ generically and are not transferable;
units, for instance, which are without position, cannot take the place
of points, which have position. The transferred terms could only fit
in as middle terms or as major or minor terms, or else have some of
the other terms between them, others outside them. 

Nor can any of the common axioms-such, I mean, as the law of excluded
middle-serve as premisses for the proof of all conclusions. For the
kinds of being are different, and some attributes attach to quanta
and some to qualia only; and proof is achieved by means of the common
axioms taken in conjunction with these several kinds and their attributes.

Again, it is not true that the basic truths are much fewer than the
conclusions, for the basic truths are the premisses, and the premisses
are formed by the apposition of a fresh extreme term or the interposition
of a fresh middle. Moreover, the number of conclusions is indefinite,
though the number of middle terms is finite; and lastly some of the
basic truths are necessary, others variable. 

Looking at it in this way we see that, since the number of conclusions
is indefinite, the basic truths cannot be identical or limited in
number. If, on the other hand, identity is used in another sense,
and it is said, e.g. 'these and no other are the fundamental truths
of geometry, these the fundamentals of calculation, these again of
medicine'; would the statement mean anything except that the sciences
have basic truths? To call them identical because they are self-identical
is absurd, since everything can be identified with everything in that
sense of identity. Nor again can the contention that all conclusions
have the same basic truths mean that from the mass of all possible
premisses any conclusion may be drawn. That would be exceedingly naive,
for it is not the case in the clearly evident mathematical sciences,
nor is it possible in analysis, since it is the immediate premisses
which are the basic truths, and a fresh conclusion is only formed
by the addition of a new immediate premiss: but if it be admitted
that it is these primary immediate premisses which are basic truths,
each subject-genus will provide one basic truth. If, however, it is
not argued that from the mass of all possible premisses any conclusion
may be proved, nor yet admitted that basic truths differ so as to
be generically different for each science, it remains to consider
the possibility that, while the basic truths of all knowledge are
within one genus, special premisses are required to prove special
conclusions. But that this cannot be the case has been shown by our
proof that the basic truths of things generically different themselves
differ generically. For fundamental truths are of two kinds, those
which are premisses of demonstration and the subject-genus; and though
the former are common, the latter-number, for instance, and magnitude-are
peculiar. 

Part 33

Scientific knowledge and its object differ from opinion and the object
of opinion in that scientific knowledge is commensurately universal
and proceeds by necessary connexions, and that which is necessary
cannot be otherwise. So though there are things which are true and
real and yet can be otherwise, scientific knowledge clearly does not
concern them: if it did, things which can be otherwise would be incapable
of being otherwise. Nor are they any concern of rational intuition-by
rational intuition I mean an originative source of scientific knowledge-nor
of indemonstrable knowledge, which is the grasping of the immediate
premiss. Since then rational intuition, science, and opinion, and
what is revealed by these terms, are the only things that can be 'true',
it follows that it is opinion that is concerned with that which may
be true or false, and can be otherwise: opinion in fact is the grasp
of a premiss which is immediate but not necessary. This view also
fits the observed facts, for opinion is unstable, and so is the kind
of being we have described as its object. Besides, when a man thinks
a truth incapable of being otherwise he always thinks that he knows
it, never that he opines it. He thinks that he opines when he thinks
that a connexion, though actually so, may quite easily be otherwise;
for he believes that such is the proper object of opinion, while the
necessary is the object of knowledge. 

In what sense, then, can the same thing be the object of both opinion
and knowledge? And if any one chooses to maintain that all that he
knows he can also opine, why should not opinion be knowledge? For
he that knows and he that opines will follow the same train of thought
through the same middle terms until the immediate premisses are reached;
because it is possible to opine not only the fact but also the reasoned
fact, and the reason is the middle term; so that, since the former
knows, he that opines also has knowledge. 

The truth perhaps is that if a man grasp truths that cannot be other
than they are, in the way in which he grasps the definitions through
which demonstrations take place, he will have not opinion but knowledge:
if on the other hand he apprehends these attributes as inhering in
their subjects, but not in virtue of the subjects' substance and essential
nature possesses opinion and not genuine knowledge; and his opinion,
if obtained through immediate premisses, will be both of the fact
and of the reasoned fact; if not so obtained, of the fact alone. The
object of opinion and knowledge is not quite identical; it is only
in a sense identical, just as the object of true and false opinion
is in a sense identical. The sense in which some maintain that true
and false opinion can have the same object leads them to embrace many
strange doctrines, particularly the doctrine that what a man opines
falsely he does not opine at all. There are really many senses of
'identical', and in one sense the object of true and false opinion
can be the same, in another it cannot. Thus, to have a true opinion
that the diagonal is commensurate with the side would be absurd: but
because the diagonal with which they are both concerned is the same,
the two opinions have objects so far the same: on the other hand,
as regards their essential definable nature these objects differ.
The identity of the objects of knowledge and opinion is similar. Knowledge
is the apprehension of, e.g. the attribute 'animal' as incapable of
being otherwise, opinion the apprehension of 'animal' as capable of
being otherwise-e.g. the apprehension that animal is an element in
the essential nature of man is knowledge; the apprehension of animal
as predicable of man but not as an element in man's essential nature
is opinion: man is the subject in both judgements, but the mode of
inherence differs. 

This also shows that one cannot opine and know the same thing simultaneously;
for then one would apprehend the same thing as both capable and incapable
of being otherwise-an impossibility. Knowledge and opinion of the
same thing can co-exist in two different people in the sense we have
explained, but not simultaneously in the same person. That would involve
a man's simultaneously apprehending, e.g. (1) that man is essentially
animal-i.e. cannot be other than animal-and (2) that man is not essentially
animal, that is, we may assume, may be other than animal.

Further consideration of modes of thinking and their distribution
under the heads of discursive thought, intuition, science, art, practical
wisdom, and metaphysical thinking, belongs rather partly to natural
science, partly to moral philosophy. 

Part 34

Quick wit is a faculty of hitting upon the middle term instantaneously.
It would be exemplified by a man who saw that the moon has her bright
side always turned towards the sun, and quickly grasped the cause
of this, namely that she borrows her light from him; or observed somebody
in conversation with a man of wealth and divined that he was borrowing
money, or that the friendship of these people sprang from a common
enmity. In all these instances he has seen the major and minor terms
and then grasped the causes, the middle terms. 

Let A represent 'bright side turned sunward', B 'lighted from the
sun', C the moon. Then B, 'lighted from the sun' is predicable of
C, the moon, and A, 'having her bright side towards the source of
her light', is predicable of B. So A is predicable of C through B.



BOOK II

Part 1 

The kinds of question we ask are as many as the kinds of things which
we know. They are in fact four:-(1) whether the connexion of an attribute
with a thing is a fact, (2) what is the reason of the connexion, (3)
whether a thing exists, (4) What is the nature of the thing. Thus,
when our question concerns a complex of thing and attribute and we
ask whether the thing is thus or otherwise qualified-whether, e.g.
the sun suffers eclipse or not-then we are asking as to the fact of
a connexion. That our inquiry ceases with the discovery that the sun
does suffer eclipse is an indication of this; and if we know from
the start that the sun suffers eclipse, we do not inquire whether
it does so or not. On the other hand, when we know the fact we ask
the reason; as, for example, when we know that the sun is being eclipsed
and that an earthquake is in progress, it is the reason of eclipse
or earthquake into which we inquire. 

Where a complex is concerned, then, those are the two questions we
ask; but for some objects of inquiry we have a different kind of question
to ask, such as whether there is or is not a centaur or a God. (By
'is or is not' I mean 'is or is not, without further qualification';
as opposed to 'is or is not [e.g.] white'.) On the other hand, when
we have ascertained the thing's existence, we inquire as to its nature,
asking, for instance, 'what, then, is God?' or 'what is man?'.

Part 2

These, then, are the four kinds of question we ask, and it is in the
answers to these questions that our knowledge consists. 

Now when we ask whether a connexion is a fact, or whether a thing
without qualification is, we are really asking whether the connexion
or the thing has a 'middle'; and when we have ascertained either that
the connexion is a fact or that the thing is-i.e. ascertained either
the partial or the unqualified being of the thing-and are proceeding
to ask the reason of the connexion or the nature of the thing, then
we are asking what the 'middle' is. 

(By distinguishing the fact of the connexion and the existence of
the thing as respectively the partial and the unqualified being of
the thing, I mean that if we ask 'does the moon suffer eclipse?',
or 'does the moon wax?', the question concerns a part of the thing's
being; for what we are asking in such questions is whether a thing
is this or that, i.e. has or has not this or that attribute: whereas,
if we ask whether the moon or night exists, the question concerns
the unqualified being of a thing.) 

We conclude that in all our inquiries we are asking either whether
there is a 'middle' or what the 'middle' is: for the 'middle' here
is precisely the cause, and it is the cause that we seek in all our
inquiries. Thus, 'Does the moon suffer eclipse?' means 'Is there or
is there not a cause producing eclipse of the moon?', and when we
have learnt that there is, our next question is, 'What, then, is this
cause? for the cause through which a thing is-not is this or that,
i.e. has this or that attribute, but without qualification is-and
the cause through which it is-not is without qualification, but is
this or that as having some essential attribute or some accident-are
both alike the middle'. By that which is without qualification I mean
the subject, e.g. moon or earth or sun or triangle; by that which
a subject is (in the partial sense) I mean a property, e.g. eclipse,
equality or inequality, interposition or non-interposition. For in
all these examples it is clear that the nature of the thing and the
reason of the fact are identical: the question 'What is eclipse?'
and its answer 'The privation of the moon's light by the interposition
of the earth' are identical with the question 'What is the reason
of eclipse?' or 'Why does the moon suffer eclipse?' and the reply
'Because of the failure of light through the earth's shutting it out'.
Again, for 'What is a concord? A commensurate numerical ratio of a
high and a low note', we may substitute 'What ratio makes a high and
a low note concordant? Their relation according to a commensurate
numerical ratio.' 'Are the high and the low note concordant?' is equivalent
to 'Is their ratio commensurate?'; and when we find that it is commensurate,
we ask 'What, then, is their ratio?'. 

Cases in which the 'middle' is sensible show that the object of our
inquiry is always the 'middle': we inquire, because we have not perceived
it, whether there is or is not a 'middle' causing, e.g. an eclipse.
On the other hand, if we were on the moon we should not be inquiring
either as to the fact or the reason, but both fact and reason would
be obvious simultaneously. For the act of perception would have enabled
us to know the universal too; since, the present fact of an eclipse
being evident, perception would then at the same time give us the
present fact of the earth's screening the sun's light, and from this
would arise the universal. 

Thus, as we maintain, to know a thing's nature is to know the reason
why it is; and this is equally true of things in so far as they are
said without qualification to he as opposed to being possessed of
some attribute, and in so far as they are said to be possessed of
some attribute such as equal to right angles, or greater or less.

Part 3

It is clear, then, that all questions are a search for a 'middle'.
Let us now state how essential nature is revealed and in what way
it can be reduced to demonstration; what definition is, and what things
are definable. And let us first discuss certain difficulties which
these questions raise, beginning what we have to say with a point
most intimately connected with our immediately preceding remarks,
namely the doubt that might be felt as to whether or not it is possible
to know the same thing in the same relation, both by definition and
by demonstration. It might, I mean, be urged that definition is held
to concern essential nature and is in every case universal and affirmative;
whereas, on the other hand, some conclusions are negative and some
are not universal; e.g. all in the second figure are negative, none
in the third are universal. And again, not even all affirmative conclusions
in the first figure are definable, e.g. 'every triangle has its angles
equal to two right angles'. An argument proving this difference between
demonstration and definition is that to have scientific knowledge
of the demonstrable is identical with possessing a demonstration of
it: hence if demonstration of such conclusions as these is possible,
there clearly cannot also be definition of them. If there could, one
might know such a conclusion also in virtue of its definition without
possessing the demonstration of it; for there is nothing to stop our
having the one without the other. 

Induction too will sufficiently convince us of this difference; for
never yet by defining anything-essential attribute or accident-did
we get knowledge of it. Again, if to define is to acquire knowledge
of a substance, at any rate such attributes are not substances.

It is evident, then, that not everything demonstrable can be defined.
What then? Can everything definable be demonstrated, or not? There
is one of our previous arguments which covers this too. Of a single
thing qua single there is a single scientific knowledge. Hence, since
to know the demonstrable scientifically is to possess the demonstration
of it, an impossible consequence will follow:-possession of its definition
without its demonstration will give knowledge of the demonstrable.

Moreover, the basic premisses of demonstrations are definitions, and
it has already been shown that these will be found indemonstrable;
either the basic premisses will be demonstrable and will depend on
prior premisses, and the regress will be endless; or the primary truths
will be indemonstrable definitions. 

But if the definable and the demonstrable are not wholly the same,
may they yet be partially the same? Or is that impossible, because
there can be no demonstration of the definable? There can be none,
because definition is of the essential nature or being of something,
and all demonstrations evidently posit and assume the essential nature-mathematical
demonstrations, for example, the nature of unity and the odd, and
all the other sciences likewise. Moreover, every demonstration proves
a predicate of a subject as attaching or as not attaching to it, but
in definition one thing is not predicated of another; we do not, e.g.
predicate animal of biped nor biped of animal, nor yet figure of plane-plane
not being figure nor figure plane. Again, to prove essential nature
is not the same as to prove the fact of a connexion. Now definition
reveals essential nature, demonstration reveals that a given attribute
attaches or does not attach to a given subject; but different things
require different demonstrations-unless the one demonstration is related
to the other as part to whole. I add this because if all triangles
have been proved to possess angles equal to two right angles, then
this attribute has been proved to attach to isosceles; for isosceles
is a part of which all triangles constitute the whole. But in the
case before us the fact and the essential nature are not so related
to one another, since the one is not a part of the other.

So it emerges that not all the definable is demonstrable nor all the
demonstrable definable; and we may draw the general conclusion that
there is no identical object of which it is possible to possess both
a definition and a demonstration. It follows obviously that definition
and demonstration are neither identical nor contained either within
the other: if they were, their objects would be related either as
identical or as whole and part. 

Part 4

So much, then, for the first stage of our problem. The next step is
to raise the question whether syllogism-i.e. demonstration-of the
definable nature is possible or, as our recent argument assumed, impossible.

We might argue it impossible on the following grounds:-(a) syllogism
proves an attribute of a subject through the middle term; on the other
hand (b) its definable nature is both 'peculiar' to a subject and
predicated of it as belonging to its essence. But in that case (1)
the subject, its definition, and the middle term connecting them must
be reciprocally predicable of one another; for if A is to C, obviously
A is 'peculiar' to B and B to C-in fact all three terms are 'peculiar'
to one another: and further (2) if A inheres in the essence of all
B and B is predicated universally of all C as belonging to C's essence,
A also must be predicated of C as belonging to its essence.

If one does not take this relation as thus duplicated-if, that is,
A is predicated as being of the essence of B, but B is not of the
essence of the subjects of which it is predicated-A will not necessarily
be predicated of C as belonging to its essence. So both premisses
will predicate essence, and consequently B also will be predicated
of C as its essence. Since, therefore, both premisses do predicate
essence-i.e. definable form-C's definable form will appear in the
middle term before the conclusion is drawn. 

We may generalize by supposing that it is possible to prove the essential
nature of man. Let C be man, A man's essential nature--two-footed
animal, or aught else it may be. Then, if we are to syllogize, A must
be predicated of all B. But this premiss will be mediated by a fresh
definition, which consequently will also be the essential nature of
man. Therefore the argument assumes what it has to prove, since B
too is the essential nature of man. It is, however, the case in which
there are only the two premisses-i.e. in which the premisses are primary
and immediate-which we ought to investigate, because it best illustrates
the point under discussion. 

Thus they who prove the essential nature of soul or man or anything
else through reciprocating terms beg the question. It would be begging
the question, for example, to contend that the soul is that which
causes its own life, and that what causes its own life is a self-moving
number; for one would have to postulate that the soul is a self-moving
number in the sense of being identical with it. For if A is predicable
as a mere consequent of B and B of C, A will not on that account be
the definable form of C: A will merely be what it was true to say
of C. Even if A is predicated of all B inasmuch as B is identical
with a species of A, still it will not follow: being an animal is
predicated of being a man-since it is true that in all instances to
be human is to be animal, just as it is also true that every man is
an animal-but not as identical with being man. 

We conclude, then, that unless one takes both the premisses as predicating
essence, one cannot infer that A is the definable form and essence
of C: but if one does so take them, in assuming B one will have assumed,
before drawing the conclusion, what the definable form of C is; so
that there has been no inference, for one has begged the question.

Part 5

Nor, as was said in my formal logic, is the method of division a process
of inference at all, since at no point does the characterization of
the subject follow necessarily from the premising of certain other
facts: division demonstrates as little as does induction. For in a
genuine demonstration the conclusion must not be put as a question
nor depend on a concession, but must follow necessarily from its premisses,
even if the respondent deny it. The definer asks 'Is man animal or
inanimate?' and then assumes-he has not inferred-that man is animal.
Next, when presented with an exhaustive division of animal into terrestrial
and aquatic, he assumes that man is terrestrial. Moreover, that man
is the complete formula, terrestrial-animal, does not follow necessarily
from the premisses: this too is an assumption, and equally an assumption
whether the division comprises many differentiae or few. (Indeed as
this method of division is used by those who proceed by it, even truths
that can be inferred actually fail to appear as such.) For why should
not the whole of this formula be true of man, and yet not exhibit
his essential nature or definable form? Again, what guarantee is there
against an unessential addition, or against the omission of the final
or of an intermediate determinant of the substantial being?

The champion of division might here urge that though these lapses
do occur, yet we can solve that difficulty if all the attributes we
assume are constituents of the definable form, and if, postulating
the genus, we produce by division the requisite uninterrupted sequence
of terms, and omit nothing; and that indeed we cannot fail to fulfil
these conditions if what is to be divided falls whole into the division
at each stage, and none of it is omitted; and that this-the dividendum-must
without further question be (ultimately) incapable of fresh specific
division. Nevertheless, we reply, division does not involve inference;
if it gives knowledge, it gives it in another way. Nor is there any
absurdity in this: induction, perhaps, is not demonstration any more
than is division, et it does make evident some truth. Yet to state
a definition reached by division is not to state a conclusion: as,
when conclusions are drawn without their appropriate middles, the
alleged necessity by which the inference follows from the premisses
is open to a question as to the reason for it, so definitions reached
by division invite the same question. 

Thus to the question 'What is the essential nature of man?' the divider
replies 'Animal, mortal, footed, biped, wingless'; and when at each
step he is asked 'Why?', he will say, and, as he thinks, proves by
division, that all animal is mortal or immortal: but such a formula
taken in its entirety is not definition; so that even if division
does demonstrate its formula, definition at any rate does not turn
out to be a conclusion of inference. 

Part 6

Can we nevertheless actually demonstrate what a thing essentially
and substantially is, but hypothetically, i.e. by premising (1) that
its definable form is constituted by the 'peculiar' attributes of
its essential nature; (2) that such and such are the only attributes
of its essential nature, and that the complete synthesis of them is
peculiar to the thing; and thus-since in this synthesis consists the
being of the thing-obtaining our conclusion? Or is the truth that,
since proof must be through the middle term, the definable form is
once more assumed in this minor premiss too? 

Further, just as in syllogizing we do not premise what syllogistic
inference is (since the premisses from which we conclude must be related
as whole and part), so the definable form must not fall within the
syllogism but remain outside the premisses posited. It is only against
a doubt as to its having been a syllogistic inference at all that
we have to defend our argument as conforming to the definition of
syllogism. It is only when some one doubts whether the conclusion
proved is the definable form that we have to defend it as conforming
to the definition of definable form which we assumed. Hence syllogistic
inference must be possible even without the express statement of what
syllogism is or what definable form is. 

The following type of hypothetical proof also begs the question. If
evil is definable as the divisible, and the definition of a thing's
contrary-if it has one the contrary of the thing's definition; then,
if good is the contrary of evil and the indivisible of the divisible,
we conclude that to be good is essentially to be indivisible. The
question is begged because definable form is assumed as a premiss,
and as a premiss which is to prove definable form. 'But not the same
definable form', you may object. That I admit, for in demonstrations
also we premise that 'this' is predicable of 'that'; but in this premiss
the term we assert of the minor is neither the major itself nor a
term identical in definition, or convertible, with the major.

Again, both proof by division and the syllogism just described are
open to the question why man should be animal-biped-terrestrial and
not merely animal and terrestrial, since what they premise does not
ensure that the predicates shall constitute a genuine unity and not
merely belong to a single subject as do musical and grammatical when
predicated of the same man. 

Part 7

How then by definition shall we prove substance or essential nature?
We cannot show it as a fresh fact necessarily following from the assumption
of premisses admitted to be facts-the method of demonstration: we
may not proceed as by induction to establish a universal on the evidence
of groups of particulars which offer no exception, because induction
proves not what the essential nature of a thing is but that it has
or has not some attribute. Therefore, since presumably one cannot
prove essential nature by an appeal to sense perception or by pointing
with the finger, what other method remains? 

To put it another way: how shall we by definition prove essential
nature? He who knows what human-or any other-nature is, must know
also that man exists; for no one knows the nature of what does not
exist-one can know the meaning of the phrase or name 'goat-stag' but
not what the essential nature of a goat-stag is. But further, if definition
can prove what is the essential nature of a thing, can it also prove
that it exists? And how will it prove them both by the same process,
since definition exhibits one single thing and demonstration another
single thing, and what human nature is and the fact that man exists
are not the same thing? Then too we hold that it is by demonstration
that the being of everything must be proved-unless indeed to be were
its essence; and, since being is not a genus, it is not the essence
of anything. Hence the being of anything as fact is matter for demonstration;
and this is the actual procedure of the sciences, for the geometer
assumes the meaning of the word triangle, but that it is possessed
of some attribute he proves. What is it, then, that we shall prove
in defining essential nature? Triangle? In that case a man will know
by definition what a thing's nature is without knowing whether it
exists. But that is impossible. 

Moreover it is clear, if we consider the methods of defining actually
in use, that definition does not prove that the thing defined exists:
since even if there does actually exist something which is equidistant
from a centre, yet why should the thing named in the definition exist?
Why, in other words, should this be the formula defining circle? One
might equally well call it the definition of mountain copper. For
definitions do not carry a further guarantee that the thing defined
can exist or that it is what they claim to define: one can always
ask why. 

Since, therefore, to define is to prove either a thing's essential
nature or the meaning of its name, we may conclude that definition,
if it in no sense proves essential nature, is a set of words signifying
precisely what a name signifies. But that were a strange consequence;
for (1) both what is not substance and what does not exist at all
would be definable, since even non-existents can be signified by a
name: (2) all sets of words or sentences would be definitions, since
any kind of sentence could be given a name; so that we should all
be talking in definitions, and even the Iliad would be a definition:
(3) no demonstration can prove that any particular name means any
particular thing: neither, therefore, do definitions, in addition
to revealing the meaning of a name, also reveal that the name has
this meaning. It appears then from these considerations that neither
definition and syllogism nor their objects are identical, and further
that definition neither demonstrates nor proves anything, and that
knowledge of essential nature is not to be obtained either by definition
or by demonstration. 

Part 8

We must now start afresh and consider which of these conclusions are
sound and which are not, and what is the nature of definition, and
whether essential nature is in any sense demonstrable and definable
or in none. 

Now to know its essential nature is, as we said, the same as to know
the cause of a thing's existence, and the proof of this depends on
the fact that a thing must have a cause. Moreover, this cause is either
identical with the essential nature of the thing or distinct from
it; and if its cause is distinct from it, the essential nature of
the thing is either demonstrable or indemonstrable. Consequently,
if the cause is distinct from the thing's essential nature and demonstration
is possible, the cause must be the middle term, and, the conclusion
proved being universal and affirmative, the proof is in the first
figure. So the method just examined of proving it through another
essential nature would be one way of proving essential nature, because
a conclusion containing essential nature must be inferred through
a middle which is an essential nature just as a 'peculiar' property
must be inferred through a middle which is a 'peculiar' property;
so that of the two definable natures of a single thing this method
will prove one and not the other. 

Now it was said before that this method could not amount to demonstration
of essential nature-it is actually a dialectical proof of it-so let
us begin again and explain by what method it can be demonstrated.
When we are aware of a fact we seek its reason, and though sometimes
the fact and the reason dawn on us simultaneously, yet we cannot apprehend
the reason a moment sooner than the fact; and clearly in just the
same way we cannot apprehend a thing's definable form without apprehending
that it exists, since while we are ignorant whether it exists we cannot
know its essential nature. Moreover we are aware whether a thing exists
or not sometimes through apprehending an element in its character,
and sometimes accidentally, as, for example, when we are aware of
thunder as a noise in the clouds, of eclipse as a privation of light,
or of man as some species of animal, or of the soul as a self-moving
thing. As often as we have accidental knowledge that the thing exists,
we must be in a wholly negative state as regards awareness of its
essential nature; for we have not got genuine knowledge even of its
existence, and to search for a thing's essential nature when we are
unaware that it exists is to search for nothing. On the other hand,
whenever we apprehend an element in the thing's character there is
less difficulty. Thus it follows that the degree of our knowledge
of a thing's essential nature is determined by the sense in which
we are aware that it exists. Let us then take the following as our
first instance of being aware of an element in the essential nature.
Let A be eclipse, C the moon, B the earth's acting as a screen. Now
to ask whether the moon is eclipsed or not is to ask whether or not
B has occurred. But that is precisely the same as asking whether A
has a defining condition; and if this condition actually exists, we
assert that A also actually exists. Or again we may ask which side
of a contradiction the defining condition necessitates: does it make
the angles of a triangle equal or not equal to two right angles? When
we have found the answer, if the premisses are immediate, we know
fact and reason together; if they are not immediate, we know the fact
without the reason, as in the following example: let C be the moon,
A eclipse, B the fact that the moon fails to produce shadows though
she is full and though no visible body intervenes between us and her.
Then if B, failure to produce shadows in spite of the absence of an
intervening body, is attributable A to C, and eclipse, is attributable
to B, it is clear that the moon is eclipsed, but the reason why is
not yet clear, and we know that eclipse exists, but we do not know
what its essential nature is. But when it is clear that A is attributable
to C and we proceed to ask the reason of this fact, we are inquiring
what is the nature of B: is it the earth's acting as a screen, or
the moon's rotation or her extinction? But B is the definition of
the other term, viz. in these examples, of the major term A; for eclipse
is constituted by the earth acting as a screen. Thus, (1) 'What is
thunder?' 'The quenching of fire in cloud', and (2) 'Why does it thunder?'
'Because fire is quenched in the cloud', are equivalent. Let C be
cloud, A thunder, B the quenching of fire. Then B is attributable
to C, cloud, since fire is quenched in it; and A, noise, is attributable
to B; and B is assuredly the definition of the major term A. If there
be a further mediating cause of B, it will be one of the remaining
partial definitions of A. 

We have stated then how essential nature is discovered and becomes
known, and we see that, while there is no syllogism-i.e. no demonstrative
syllogism-of essential nature, yet it is through syllogism, viz. demonstrative
syllogism, that essential nature is exhibited. So we conclude that
neither can the essential nature of anything which has a cause distinct
from itself be known without demonstration, nor can it be demonstrated;
and this is what we contended in our preliminary discussions.

Part 9

Now while some things have a cause distinct from themselves, others
have not. Hence it is evident that there are essential natures which
are immediate, that is are basic premisses; and of these not only
that they are but also what they are must be assumed or revealed in
some other way. This too is the actual procedure of the arithmetician,
who assumes both the nature and the existence of unit. On the other
hand, it is possible (in the manner explained) to exhibit through
demonstration the essential nature of things which have a 'middle',
i.e. a cause of their substantial being other than that being itself;
but we do not thereby demonstrate it. 

Part 10

Since definition is said to be the statement of a thing's nature,
obviously one kind of definition will be a statement of the meaning
of the name, or of an equivalent nominal formula. A definition in
this sense tells you, e.g. the meaning of the phrase 'triangular character'.
When we are aware that triangle exists, we inquire the reason why
it exists. But it is difficult thus to learn the definition of things
the existence of which we do not genuinely know-the cause of this
difficulty being, as we said before, that we only know accidentally
whether or not the thing exists. Moreover, a statement may be a unity
in either of two ways, by conjunction, like the Iliad, or because
it exhibits a single predicate as inhering not accidentally in a single
subject. 

That then is one way of defining definition. Another kind of definition
is a formula exhibiting the cause of a thing's existence. Thus the
former signifies without proving, but the latter will clearly be a
quasi-demonstration of essential nature, differing from demonstration
in the arrangement of its terms. For there is a difference between
stating why it thunders, and stating what is the essential nature
of thunder; since the first statement will be 'Because fire is quenched
in the clouds', while the statement of what the nature of thunder
is will be 'The noise of fire being quenched in the clouds'. Thus
the same statement takes a different form: in one form it is continuous
demonstration, in the other definition. Again, thunder can be defined
as noise in the clouds, which is the conclusion of the demonstration
embodying essential nature. On the other hand the definition of immediates
is an indemonstrable positing of essential nature. 

We conclude then that definition is (a) an indemonstrable statement
of essential nature, or (b) a syllogism of essential nature differing
from demonstration in grammatical form, or (c) the conclusion of a
demonstration giving essential nature. 

Our discussion has therefore made plain (1) in what sense and of what
things the essential nature is demonstrable, and in what sense and
of what things it is not; (2) what are the various meanings of the
term definition, and in what sense and of what things it proves the
essential nature, and in what sense and of what things it does not;
(3) what is the relation of definition to demonstration, and how far
the same thing is both definable and demonstrable and how far it is
not. 

Part 11

We think we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause, and
there are four causes: (1) the definable form, (2) an antecedent which
necessitates a consequent, (3) the efficient cause, (4) the final
cause. Hence each of these can be the middle term of a proof, for
(a) though the inference from antecedent to necessary consequent does
not hold if only one premiss is assumed-two is the minimum-still when
there are two it holds on condition that they have a single common
middle term. So it is from the assumption of this single middle term
that the conclusion follows necessarily. The following example will
also show this. Why is the angle in a semicircle a right angle?-or
from what assumption does it follow that it is a right angle? Thus,
let A be right angle, B the half of two right angles, C the angle
in a semicircle. Then B is the cause in virtue of which A, right angle,
is attributable to C, the angle in a semicircle, since B=A and the
other, viz. C,=B, for C is half of two right angles. Therefore it
is the assumption of B, the half of two right angles, from which it
follows that A is attributable to C, i.e. that the angle in a semicircle
is a right angle. Moreover, B is identical with (b) the defining form
of A, since it is what A's definition signifies. Moreover, the formal
cause has already been shown to be the middle. (c) 'Why did the Athenians
become involved in the Persian war?' means 'What cause originated
the waging of war against the Athenians?' and the answer is, 'Because
they raided Sardis with the Eretrians', since this originated the
war. Let A be war, B unprovoked raiding, C the Athenians. Then B,
unprovoked raiding, is true of C, the Athenians, and A is true of
B, since men make war on the unjust aggressor. So A, having war waged
upon them, is true of B, the initial aggressors, and B is true of
C, the Athenians, who were the aggressors. Hence here too the cause-in
this case the efficient cause-is the middle term. (d) This is no less
true where the cause is the final cause. E.g. why does one take a
walk after supper? For the sake of one's health. Why does a house
exist? For the preservation of one's goods. The end in view is in
the one case health, in the other preservation. To ask the reason
why one must walk after supper is precisely to ask to what end one
must do it. Let C be walking after supper, B the non-regurgitation
of food, A health. Then let walking after supper possess the property
of preventing food from rising to the orifice of the stomach, and
let this condition be healthy; since it seems that B, the non-regurgitation
of food, is attributable to C, taking a walk, and that A, health,
is attributable to B. What, then, is the cause through which A, the
final cause, inheres in C? It is B, the non-regurgitation of food;
but B is a kind of definition of A, for A will be explained by it.
Why is B the cause of A's belonging to C? Because to be in a condition
such as B is to be in health. The definitions must be transposed,
and then the detail will become clearer. Incidentally, here the order
of coming to be is the reverse of what it is in proof through the
efficient cause: in the efficient order the middle term must come
to be first, whereas in the teleological order the minor, C, must
first take place, and the end in view comes last in time.

The same thing may exist for an end and be necessitated as well. For
example, light shines through a lantern (1) because that which consists
of relatively small particles necessarily passes through pores larger
than those particles-assuming that light does issue by penetration-
and (2) for an end, namely to save us from stumbling. If then, a thing
can exist through two causes, can it come to be through two causes-as
for instance if thunder be a hiss and a roar necessarily produced
by the quenching of fire, and also designed, as the Pythagoreans say,
for a threat to terrify those that lie in Tartarus? Indeed, there
are very many such cases, mostly among the processes and products
of the natural world; for nature, in different senses of the term
'nature', produces now for an end, now by necessity. 

Necessity too is of two kinds. It may work in accordance with a thing's
natural tendency, or by constraint and in opposition to it; as, for
instance, by necessity a stone is borne both upwards and downwards,
but not by the same necessity. 

Of the products of man's intelligence some are never due to chance
or necessity but always to an end, as for example a house or a statue;
others, such as health or safety, may result from chance as well.

It is mostly in cases where the issue is indeterminate (though only
where the production does not originate in chance, and the end is
consequently good), that a result is due to an end, and this is true
alike in nature or in art. By chance, on the other hand, nothing comes
to be for an end. 

Part 12 The effect may be still coming to be, or its occurrence may
be past or future, yet the cause will be the same as when it is actually
existent-for it is the middle which is the cause-except that if the
effect actually exists the cause is actually existent, if it is coming
to be so is the cause, if its occurrence is past the cause is past,
if future the cause is future. For example, the moon was eclipsed
because the earth intervened, is becoming eclipsed because the earth
is in process of intervening, will be eclipsed because the earth will
intervene, is eclipsed because the earth intervenes. 

To take a second example: assuming that the definition of ice is solidified
water, let C be water, A solidified, B the middle, which is the cause,
namely total failure of heat. Then B is attributed to C, and A, solidification,
to B: ice when B is occurring, has formed when B has occurred, and
will form when B shall occur. 

This sort of cause, then, and its effect come to be simultaneously
when they are in process of becoming, and exist simultaneously when
they actually exist; and the same holds good when they are past and
when they are future. But what of cases where they are not simultaneous?
Can causes and effects different from one another form, as they seem
to us to form, a continuous succession, a past effect resulting from
a past cause different from itself, a future effect from a future
cause different from it, and an effect which is coming-to-be from
a cause different from and prior to it? Now on this theory it is from
the posterior event that we reason (and this though these later events
actually have their source of origin in previous events--a fact which
shows that also when the effect is coming-to-be we still reason from
the posterior event), and from the event we cannot reason (we cannot
argue that because an event A has occurred, therefore an event B has
occurred subsequently to A but still in the past-and the same holds
good if the occurrence is future)-cannot reason because, be the time
interval definite or indefinite, it will never be possible to infer
that because it is true to say that A occurred, therefore it is true
to say that B, the subsequent event, occurred; for in the interval
between the events, though A has already occurred, the latter statement
will be false. And the same argument applies also to future events;
i.e. one cannot infer from an event which occurred in the past that
a future event will occur. The reason of this is that the middle must
be homogeneous, past when the extremes are past, future when they
are future, coming to be when they are coming-to-be, actually existent
when they are actually existent; and there cannot be a middle term
homogeneous with extremes respectively past and future. And it is
a further difficulty in this theory that the time interval can be
neither indefinite nor definite, since during it the inference will
be false. We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together
so that the coming-to-be now occurring in actual things follows upon
a past event. It is evident, we may suggest, that a past event and
a present process cannot be 'contiguous', for not even two past events
can be 'contiguous'. For past events are limits and atomic; so just
as points are not 'contiguous' neither are past events, since both
are indivisible. For the same reason a past event and a present process
cannot be 'contiguous', for the process is divisible, the event indivisible.
Thus the relation of present process to past event is analogous to
that of line to point, since a process contains an infinity of past
events. These questions, however, must receive a more explicit treatment
in our general theory of change. 

The following must suffice as an account of the manner in which the
middle would be identical with the cause on the supposition that coming-to-be
is a series of consecutive events: for in the terms of such a series
too the middle and major terms must form an immediate premiss; e.g.
we argue that, since C has occurred, therefore A occurred: and C's
occurrence was posterior, A's prior; but C is the source of the inference
because it is nearer to the present moment, and the starting-point
of time is the present. We next argue that, since D has occurred,
therefore C occurred. Then we conclude that, since D has occurred,
therefore A must have occurred; and the cause is C, for since D has
occurred C must have occurred, and since C has occurred A must previously
have occurred. 

If we get our middle term in this way, will the series terminate in
an immediate premiss, or since, as we said, no two events are 'contiguous',
will a fresh middle term always intervene because there is an infinity
of middles? No: though no two events are 'contiguous', yet we must
start from a premiss consisting of a middle and the present event
as major. The like is true of future events too, since if it is true
to say that D will exist, it must be a prior truth to say that A will
exist, and the cause of this conclusion is C; for if D will exist,
C will exist prior to D, and if C will exist, A will exist prior to
it. And here too the same infinite divisibility might be urged, since
future events are not 'contiguous'. But here too an immediate basic
premiss must be assumed. And in the world of fact this is so: if a
house has been built, then blocks must have been quarried and shaped.
The reason is that a house having been built necessitates a foundation
having been laid, and if a foundation has been laid blocks must have
been shaped beforehand. Again, if a house will be built, blocks will
similarly be shaped beforehand; and proof is through the middle in
the same way, for the foundation will exist before the house.

Now we observe in Nature a certain kind of circular process of coming-to-be;
and this is possible only if the middle and extreme terms are reciprocal,
since conversion is conditioned by reciprocity in the terms of the
proof. This-the convertibility of conclusions and premisses-has been
proved in our early chapters, and the circular process is an instance
of this. In actual fact it is exemplified thus: when the earth had
been moistened an exhalation was bound to rise, and when an exhalation
had risen cloud was bound to form, and from the formation of cloud
rain necessarily resulted and by the fall of rain the earth was necessarily
moistened: but this was the starting-point, so that a circle is completed;
for posit any one of the terms and another follows from it, and from
that another, and from that again the first. 

Some occurrences are universal (for they are, or come-to-be what they
are, always and in ever case); others again are not always what they
are but only as a general rule: for instance, not every man can grow
a beard, but it is the general rule. In the case of such connexions
the middle term too must be a general rule. For if A is predicated
universally of B and B of C, A too must be predicated always and in
every instance of C, since to hold in every instance and always is
of the nature of the universal. But we have assumed a connexion which
is a general rule; consequently the middle term B must also be a general
rule. So connexions which embody a general rule-i.e. which exist or
come to be as a general rule-will also derive from immediate basic
premisses. 

Part 13

We have already explained how essential nature is set out in the terms
of a demonstration, and the sense in which it is or is not demonstrable
or definable; so let us now discuss the method to be adopted in tracing
the elements predicated as constituting the definable form.

Now of the attributes which inhere always in each several thing there
are some which are wider in extent than it but not wider than its
genus (by attributes of wider extent mean all such as are universal
attributes of each several subject, but in their application are not
confined to that subject). while an attribute may inhere in every
triad, yet also in a subject not a triad-as being inheres in triad
but also in subjects not numbers at all-odd on the other hand is an
attribute inhering in every triad and of wider application (inhering
as it does also in pentad), but which does not extend beyond the genus
of triad; for pentad is a number, but nothing outside number is odd.
It is such attributes which we have to select, up to the exact point
at which they are severally of wider extent than the subject but collectively
coextensive with it; for this synthesis must be the substance of the
thing. For example every triad possesses the attributes number, odd,
and prime in both senses, i.e. not only as possessing no divisors,
but also as not being a sum of numbers. This, then, is precisely what
triad is, viz. a number, odd, and prime in the former and also the
latter sense of the term: for these attributes taken severally apply,
the first two to all odd numbers, the last to the dyad also as well
as to the triad, but, taken collectively, to no other subject. Now
since we have shown above' that attributes predicated as belonging
to the essential nature are necessary and that universals are necessary,
and since the attributes which we select as inhering in triad, or
in any other subject whose attributes we select in this way, are predicated
as belonging to its essential nature, triad will thus possess these
attributes necessarily. Further, that the synthesis of them constitutes
the substance of triad is shown by the following argument. If it is
not identical with the being of triad, it must be related to triad
as a genus named or nameless. It will then be of wider extent than
triad-assuming that wider potential extent is the character of a genus.
If on the other hand this synthesis is applicable to no subject other
than the individual triads, it will be identical with the being of
triad, because we make the further assumption that the substance of
each subject is the predication of elements in its essential nature
down to the last differentia characterizing the individuals. It follows
that any other synthesis thus exhibited will likewise be identical
with the being of the subject. 

The author of a hand-book on a subject that is a generic whole should
divide the genus into its first infimae species-number e.g. into triad
and dyad-and then endeavour to seize their definitions by the method
we have described-the definition, for example, of straight line or
circle or right angle. After that, having established what the category
is to which the subaltern genus belongs-quantity or quality, for instance-he
should examine the properties 'peculiar' to the species, working through
the proximate common differentiae. He should proceed thus because
the attributes of the genera compounded of the infimae species will
be clearly given by the definitions of the species; since the basic
element of them all is the definition, i.e. the simple infirma species,
and the attributes inhere essentially in the simple infimae species,
in the genera only in virtue of these. 

Divisions according to differentiae are a useful accessory to this
method. What force they have as proofs we did, indeed, explain above,
but that merely towards collecting the essential nature they may be
of use we will proceed to show. They might, indeed, seem to be of
no use at all, but rather to assume everything at the start and to
be no better than an initial assumption made without division. But,
in fact, the order in which the attributes are predicated does make
a difference--it matters whether we say animal-tame-biped, or biped-animal-tame.
For if every definable thing consists of two elements and 'animal-tame'
forms a unity, and again out of this and the further differentia man
(or whatever else is the unity under construction) is constituted,
then the elements we assume have necessarily been reached by division.
Again, division is the only possible method of avoiding the omission
of any element of the essential nature. Thus, if the primary genus
is assumed and we then take one of the lower divisions, the dividendum
will not fall whole into this division: e.g. it is not all animal
which is either whole-winged or split-winged but all winged animal,
for it is winged animal to which this differentiation belongs. The
primary differentiation of animal is that within which all animal
falls. The like is true of every other genus, whether outside animal
or a subaltern genus of animal; e.g. the primary differentiation of
bird is that within which falls every bird, of fish that within which
falls every fish. So, if we proceed in this way, we can be sure that
nothing has been omitted: by any other method one is bound to omit
something without knowing it. 

To define and divide one need not know the whole of existence. Yet
some hold it impossible to know the differentiae distinguishing each
thing from every single other thing without knowing every single other
thing; and one cannot, they say, know each thing without knowing its
differentiae, since everything is identical with that from which it
does not differ, and other than that from which it differs. Now first
of all this is a fallacy: not every differentia precludes identity,
since many differentiae inhere in things specifically identical, though
not in the substance of these nor essentially. Secondly, when one
has taken one's differing pair of opposites and assumed that the two
sides exhaust the genus, and that the subject one seeks to define
is present in one or other of them, and one has further verified its
presence in one of them; then it does not matter whether or not one
knows all the other subjects of which the differentiae are also predicated.
For it is obvious that when by this process one reaches subjects incapable
of further differentiation one will possess the formula defining the
substance. Moreover, to postulate that the division exhausts the genus
is not illegitimate if the opposites exclude a middle; since if it
is the differentia of that genus, anything contained in the genus
must lie on one of the two sides. 

In establishing a definition by division one should keep three objects
in view: (1) the admission only of elements in the definable form,
(2) the arrangement of these in the right order, (3) the omission
of no such elements. The first is feasible because one can establish
genus and differentia through the topic of the genus, just as one
can conclude the inherence of an accident through the topic of the
accident. The right order will be achieved if the right term is assumed
as primary, and this will be ensured if the term selected is predicable
of all the others but not all they of it; since there must be one
such term. Having assumed this we at once proceed in the same way
with the lower terms; for our second term will be the first of the
remainder, our third the first of those which follow the second in
a 'contiguous' series, since when the higher term is excluded, that
term of the remainder which is 'contiguous' to it will be primary,
and so on. Our procedure makes it clear that no elements in the definable
form have been omitted: we have taken the differentia that comes first
in the order of division, pointing out that animal, e.g. is divisible
exhaustively into A and B, and that the subject accepts one of the
two as its predicate. Next we have taken the differentia of the whole
thus reached, and shown that the whole we finally reach is not further
divisible-i.e. that as soon as we have taken the last differentia
to form the concrete totality, this totality admits of no division
into species. For it is clear that there is no superfluous addition,
since all these terms we have selected are elements in the definable
form; and nothing lacking, since any omission would have to be a genus
or a differentia. Now the primary term is a genus, and this term taken
in conjunction with its differentiae is a genus: moreover the differentiae
are all included, because there is now no further differentia; if
there were, the final concrete would admit of division into species,
which, we said, is not the case. 

To resume our account of the right method of investigation: We must
start by observing a set of similar-i.e. specifically identical-individuals,
and consider what element they have in common. We must then apply
the same process to another set of individuals which belong to one
species and are generically but not specifically identical with the
former set. When we have established what the common element is in
all members of this second species, and likewise in members of further
species, we should again consider whether the results established
possess any identity, and persevere until we reach a single formula,
since this will be the definition of the thing. But if we reach not
one formula but two or more, evidently the definiendum cannot be one
thing but must be more than one. I may illustrate my meaning as follows.
If we were inquiring what the essential nature of pride is, we should
examine instances of proud men we know of to see what, as such, they
have in common; e.g. if Alcibiades was proud, or Achilles and Ajax
were proud, we should find on inquiring what they all had in common,
that it was intolerance of insult; it was this which drove Alcibiades
to war, Achilles wrath, and Ajax to suicide. We should next examine
other cases, Lysander, for example, or Socrates, and then if these
have in common indifference alike to good and ill fortune, I take
these two results and inquire what common element have equanimity
amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonour. If they
have none, there will be two genera of pride. Besides, every definition
is always universal and commensurate: the physician does not prescribe
what is healthy for a single eye, but for all eyes or for a determinate
species of eye. It is also easier by this method to define the single
species than the universal, and that is why our procedure should be
from the several species to the universal genera-this for the further
reason too that equivocation is less readily detected in genera than
in infimae species. Indeed, perspicuity is essential in definitions,
just as inferential movement is the minimum required in demonstrations;
and we shall attain perspicuity if we can collect separately the definition
of each species through the group of singulars which we have established
e.g. the definition of similarity not unqualified but restricted to
colours and to figures; the definition of acuteness, but only of sound-and
so proceed to the common universal with a careful avoidance of equivocation.
We may add that if dialectical disputation must not employ metaphors,
clearly metaphors and metaphorical expressions are precluded in definition:
otherwise dialectic would involve metaphors. 

Part 14

In order to formulate the connexions we wish to prove we have to select
our analyses and divisions. The method of selection consists in laying
down the common genus of all our subjects of investigation-if e.g.
they are animals, we lay down what the properties are which inhere
in every animal. These established, we next lay down the properties
essentially connected with the first of the remaining classes-e.g.
if this first subgenus is bird, the essential properties of every
bird-and so on, always characterizing the proximate subgenus. This
will clearly at once enable us to say in virtue of what character
the subgenera-man, e.g. or horse-possess their properties. Let A be
animal, B the properties of every animal, C D E various species of
animal. Then it is clear in virtue of what character B inheres in
D-namely A-and that it inheres in C and E for the same reason: and
throughout the remaining subgenera always the same rule applies.

We are now taking our examples from the traditional class-names, but
we must not confine ourselves to considering these. We must collect
any other common character which we observe, and then consider with
what species it is connected and what.properties belong to it. For
example, as the common properties of horned animals we collect the
possession of a third stomach and only one row of teeth. Then since
it is clear in virtue of what character they possess these attributes-namely
their horned character-the next question is, to what species does
the possession of horns attach? 

Yet a further method of selection is by analogy: for we cannot find
a single identical name to give to a squid's pounce, a fish's spine,
and an animal's bone, although these too possess common properties
as if there were a single osseous nature. 

Part 15

Some connexions that require proof are identical in that they possess
an identical 'middle' e.g. a whole group might be proved through 'reciprocal
replacement'-and of these one class are identical in genus, namely
all those whose difference consists in their concerning different
subjects or in their mode of manifestation. This latter class may
be exemplified by the questions as to the causes respectively of echo,
of reflection, and of the rainbow: the connexions to be proved which
these questions embody are identical generically, because all three
are forms of repercussion; but specifically they are different.

Other connexions that require proof only differ in that the 'middle'
of the one is subordinate to the 'middle' of the other. For example:
Why does the Nile rise towards the end of the month? Because towards
its close the month is more stormy. Why is the month more stormy towards
its close? Because the moon is waning. Here the one cause is subordinate
to the other. 

Part 16

The question might be raised with regard to cause and effect whether
when the effect is present the cause also is present; whether, for
instance, if a plant sheds its leaves or the moon is eclipsed, there
is present also the cause of the eclipse or of the fall of the leaves-the
possession of broad leaves, let us say, in the latter case, in the
former the earth's interposition. For, one might argue, if this cause
is not present, these phenomena will have some other cause: if it
is present, its effect will be at once implied by it-the eclipse by
the earth's interposition, the fall of the leaves by the possession
of broad leaves; but if so, they will be logically coincident and
each capable of proof through the other. Let me illustrate: Let A
be deciduous character, B the possession of broad leaves, C vine.
Now if A inheres in B (for every broad-leaved plant is deciduous),
and B in C (every vine possessing broad leaves); then A inheres in
C (every vine is deciduous), and the middle term B is the cause. But
we can also demonstrate that the vine has broad leaves because it
is deciduous. Thus, let D be broad-leaved, E deciduous, F vine. Then
E inheres in F (since every vine is deciduous), and D in E (for every
deciduous plant has broad leaves): therefore every vine has broad
leaves, and the cause is its deciduous character. If, however, they
cannot each be the cause of the other (for cause is prior to effect,
and the earth's interposition is the cause of the moon's eclipse and
not the eclipse of the interposition)-if, then, demonstration through
the cause is of the reasoned fact and demonstration not through the
cause is of the bare fact, one who knows it through the eclipse knows
the fact of the earth's interposition but not the reasoned fact. Moreover,
that the eclipse is not the cause of the interposition, but the interposition
of the eclipse, is obvious because the interposition is an element
in the definition of eclipse, which shows that the eclipse is known
through the interposition and not vice versa. 

On the other hand, can a single effect have more than one cause? One
might argue as follows: if the same attribute is predicable of more
than one thing as its primary subject, let B be a primary subject
in which A inheres, and C another primary subject of A, and D and
E primary subjects of B and C respectively. A will then inhere in
D and E, and B will be the cause of A's inherence in D, C of A's inherence
in E. The presence of the cause thus necessitates that of the effect,
but the presence of the effect necessitates the presence not of all
that may cause it but only of a cause which yet need not be the whole
cause. We may, however, suggest that if the connexion to be proved
is always universal and commensurate, not only will the cause be a
whole but also the effect will be universal and commensurate. For
instance, deciduous character will belong exclusively to a subject
which is a whole, and, if this whole has species, universally and
commensurately to those species-i.e. either to all species of plant
or to a single species. So in these universal and commensurate connexions
the 'middle' and its effect must reciprocate, i.e. be convertible.
Supposing, for example, that the reason why trees are deciduous is
the coagulation of sap, then if a tree is deciduous, coagulation must
be present, and if coagulation is present-not in any subject but in
a tree-then that tree must be deciduous. 

Part 17

Can the cause of an identical effect be not identical in every instance
of the effect but different? Or is that impossible? Perhaps it is
impossible if the effect is demonstrated as essential and not as inhering
in virtue of a symptom or an accident-because the middle is then the
definition of the major term-though possible if the demonstration
is not essential. Now it is possible to consider the effect and its
subject as an accidental conjunction, though such conjunctions would
not be regarded as connexions demanding scientific proof. But if they
are accepted as such, the middle will correspond to the extremes,
and be equivocal if they are equivocal, generically one if they are
generically one. Take the question why proportionals alternate. The
cause when they are lines, and when they are numbers, is both different
and identical; different in so far as lines are lines and not numbers,
identical as involving a given determinate increment. In all proportionals
this is so. Again, the cause of likeness between colour and colour
is other than that between figure and figure; for likeness here is
equivocal, meaning perhaps in the latter case equality of the ratios
of the sides and equality of the angles, in the case of colours identity
of the act of perceiving them, or something else of the sort. Again,
connexions requiring proof which are identical by analogy middles
also analogous. 

The truth is that cause, effect, and subject are reciprocally predicable
in the following way. If the species are taken severally, the effect
is wider than the subject (e.g. the possession of external angles
equal to four right angles is an attribute wider than triangle or
are), but it is coextensive with the species taken collectively (in
this instance with all figures whose external angles are equal to
four right angles). And the middle likewise reciprocates, for the
middle is a definition of the major; which is incidentally the reason
why all the sciences are built up through definition. 

We may illustrate as follows. Deciduous is a universal attribute of
vine, and is at the same time of wider extent than vine; and of fig,
and is of wider extent than fig: but it is not wider than but coextensive
with the totality of the species. Then if you take the middle which
is proximate, it is a definition of deciduous. I say that, because
you will first reach a middle next the subject, and a premiss asserting
it of the whole subject, and after that a middle-the coagulation of
sap or something of the sort-proving the connexion of the first middle
with the major: but it is the coagulation of sap at the junction of
leaf-stalk and stem which defines deciduous. 

If an explanation in formal terms of the inter-relation of cause and
effect is demanded, we shall offer the following. Let A be an attribute
of all B, and B of every species of D, but so that both A and B are
wider than their respective subjects. Then B will be a universal attribute
of each species of D (since I call such an attribute universal even
if it is not commensurate, and I call an attribute primary universal
if it is commensurate, not with each species severally but with their
totality), and it extends beyond each of them taken separately.

Thus, B is the cause of A's inherence in the species of D: consequently
A must be of wider extent than B; otherwise why should B be the cause
of A's inherence in D any more than A the cause of B's inherence in
D? Now if A is an attribute of all the species of E, all the species
of E will be united by possessing some common cause other than B:
otherwise how shall we be able to say that A is predicable of all
of which E is predicable, while E is not predicable of all of which
A can be predicated? I mean how can there fail to be some special
cause of A's inherence in E, as there was of A's inherence in all
the species of D? Then are the species of E, too, united by possessing
some common cause? This cause we must look for. Let us call it C.

We conclude, then, that the same effect may have more than one cause,
but not in subjects specifically identical. For instance, the cause
of longevity in quadrupeds is lack of bile, in birds a dry constitution-or
certainly something different. 

Part 18

If immediate premisses are not reached at once, and there is not merely
one middle but several middles, i.e. several causes; is the cause
of the property's inherence in the several species the middle which
is proximate to the primary universal, or the middle which is proximate
to the species? Clearly the cause is that nearest to each species
severally in which it is manifested, for that is the cause of the
subject's falling under the universal. To illustrate formally: C is
the cause of B's inherence in D; hence C is the cause of A's inherence
in D, B of A's inherence in C, while the cause of A's inherence in
B is B itself. 

Part 19

As regards syllogism and demonstration, the definition of, and the
conditions required to produce each of them, are now clear, and with
that also the definition of, and the conditions required to produce,
demonstrative knowledge, since it is the same as demonstration. As
to the basic premisses, how they become known and what is the developed
state of knowledge of them is made clear by raising some preliminary
problems. 

We have already said that scientific knowledge through demonstration
is impossible unless a man knows the primary immediate premisses.
But there are questions which might be raised in respect of the apprehension
of these immediate premisses: one might not only ask whether it is
of the same kind as the apprehension of the conclusions, but also
whether there is or is not scientific knowledge of both; or scientific
knowledge of the latter, and of the former a different kind of knowledge;
and, further, whether the developed states of knowledge are not innate
but come to be in us, or are innate but at first unnoticed. Now it
is strange if we possess them from birth; for it means that we possess
apprehensions more accurate than demonstration and fail to notice
them. If on the other hand we acquire them and do not previously possess
them, how could we apprehend and learn without a basis of pre-existent
knowledge? For that is impossible, as we used to find in the case
of demonstration. So it emerges that neither can we possess them from
birth, nor can they come to be in us if we are without knowledge of
them to the extent of having no such developed state at all. Therefore
we must possess a capacity of some sort, but not such as to rank higher
in accuracy than these developed states. And this at least is an obvious
characteristic of all animals, for they possess a congenital discriminative
capacity which is called sense-perception. But though sense-perception
is innate in all animals, in some the sense-impression comes to persist,
in others it does not. So animals in which this persistence does not
come to be have either no knowledge at all outside the act of perceiving,
or no knowledge of objects of which no impression persists; animals
in which it does come into being have perception and can continue
to retain the sense-impression in the soul: and when such persistence
is frequently repeated a further distinction at once arises between
those which out of the persistence of such sense-impressions develop
a power of systematizing them and those which do not. So out of sense-perception
comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories
of the same thing develops experience; for a number of memories constitute
a single experience. From experience again-i.e. from the universal
now stabilized in its entirety within the soul, the one beside the
many which is a single identity within them all-originate the skill
of the craftsman and the knowledge of the man of science, skill in
the sphere of coming to be and science in the sphere of being.

We conclude that these states of knowledge are neither innate in a
determinate form, nor developed from other higher states of knowledge,
but from sense-perception. It is like a rout in battle stopped by
first one man making a stand and then another, until the original
formation has been restored. The soul is so constituted as to be capable
of this process. 

Let us now restate the account given already, though with insufficient
clearness. When one of a number of logically indiscriminable particulars
has made a stand, the earliest universal is present in the soul: for
though the act of sense-perception is of the particular, its content
is universal-is man, for example, not the man Callias. A fresh stand
is made among these rudimentary universals, and the process does not
cease until the indivisible concepts, the true universals, are established:
e.g. such and such a species of animal is a step towards the genus
animal, which by the same process is a step towards a further generalization.

Thus it is clear that we must get to know the primary premisses by
induction; for the method by which even sense-perception implants
the universal is inductive. Now of the thinking states by which we
grasp truth, some are unfailingly true, others admit of error-opinion,
for instance, and calculation, whereas scientific knowing and intuition
are always true: further, no other kind of thought except intuition
is more accurate than scientific knowledge, whereas primary premisses
are more knowable than demonstrations, and all scientific knowledge
is discursive. From these considerations it follows that there will
be no scientific knowledge of the primary premisses, and since except
intuition nothing can be truer than scientific knowledge, it will
be intuition that apprehends the primary premisses-a result which
also follows from the fact that demonstration cannot be the originative
source of demonstration, nor, consequently, scientific knowledge of
scientific knowledge.If, therefore, it is the only other kind of true
thinking except scientific knowing, intuition will be the originative
source of scientific knowledge. And the originative source of science
grasps the original basic premiss, while science as a whole is similarly
related as originative source to the whole body of fact.

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

We must first state the subject of our inquiry and the faculty to
which it belongs: its subject is demonstration and the faculty that
carries it out demonstrative science. We must next define a premiss,
a term, and a syllogism, and the nature of a perfect and of an imperfect
syllogism; and after that, the inclusion or noninclusion of one term
in another as in a whole, and what we mean by predicating one term
of all, or none, of another. 

A premiss then is a sentence affirming or denying one thing of another.
This is either universal or particular or indefinite. By universal
I mean the statement that something belongs to all or none of something
else; by particular that it belongs to some or not to some or not
to all; by indefinite that it does or does not belong, without any
mark to show whether it is universal or particular, e.g. 'contraries
are subjects of the same science', or 'pleasure is not good'. The
demonstrative premiss differs from the dialectical, because the demonstrative
premiss is the assertion of one of two contradictory statements (the
demonstrator does not ask for his premiss, but lays it down), whereas
the dialectical premiss depends on the adversary's choice between
two contradictories. But this will make no difference to the production
of a syllogism in either case; for both the demonstrator and the dialectician
argue syllogistically after stating that something does or does not
belong to something else. Therefore a syllogistic premiss without
qualification will be an affirmation or denial of something concerning
something else in the way we have described; it will be demonstrative,
if it is true and obtained through the first principles of its science;
while a dialectical premiss is the giving of a choice between two
contradictories, when a man is proceeding by question, but when he
is syllogizing it is the assertion of that which is apparent and generally
admitted, as has been said in the Topics. The nature then of a premiss
and the difference between syllogistic, demonstrative, and dialectical
premisses, may be taken as sufficiently defined by us in relation
to our present need, but will be stated accurately in the sequel.

I call that a term into which the premiss is resolved, i.e. both the
predicate and that of which it is predicated, 'being' being added
and 'not being' removed, or vice versa. 

A syllogism is discourse in which, certain things being stated, something
other than what is stated follows of necessity from their being so.
I mean by the last phrase that they produce the consequence, and by
this, that no further term is required from without in order to make
the consequence necessary. 

I call that a perfect syllogism which needs nothing other than what
has been stated to make plain what necessarily follows; a syllogism
is imperfect, if it needs either one or more propositions, which are
indeed the necessary consequences of the terms set down, but have
not been expressly stated as premisses. 

That one term should be included in another as in a whole is the same
as for the other to be predicated of all of the first. And we say
that one term is predicated of all of another, whenever no instance
of the subject can be found of which the other term cannot be asserted:
'to be predicated of none' must be understood in the same way.

Part 2

Every premiss states that something either is or must be or may be
the attribute of something else; of premisses of these three kinds
some are affirmative, others negative, in respect of each of the three
modes of attribution; again some affirmative and negative premisses
are universal, others particular, others indefinite. It is necessary
then that in universal attribution the terms of the negative premiss
should be convertible, e.g. if no pleasure is good, then no good will
be pleasure; the terms of the affirmative must be convertible, not
however, universally, but in part, e.g. if every pleasure,is good,
some good must be pleasure; the particular affirmative must convert
in part (for if some pleasure is good, then some good will be pleasure);
but the particular negative need not convert, for if some animal is
not man, it does not follow that some man is not animal.

First then take a universal negative with the terms A and B. If no
B is A, neither can any A be B. For if some A (say C) were B, it would
not be true that no B is A; for C is a B. But if every B is A then
some A is B. For if no A were B, then no B could be A. But we assumed
that every B is A. Similarly too, if the premiss is particular. For
if some B is A, then some of the As must be B. For if none were, then
no B would be A. But if some B is not A, there is no necessity that
some of the As should not be B; e.g. let B stand for animal and A
for man. Not every animal is a man; but every man is an animal.

Part 3

The same manner of conversion will hold good also in respect of necessary
premisses. The universal negative converts universally; each of the
affirmatives converts into a particular. If it is necessary that no
B is A, it is necessary also that no A is B. For if it is possible
that some A is B, it would be possible also that some B is A. If all
or some B is A of necessity, it is necessary also that some A is B:
for if there were no necessity, neither would some of the Bs be A
necessarily. But the particular negative does not convert, for the
same reason which we have already stated. 

In respect of possible premisses, since possibility is used in several
senses (for we say that what is necessary and what is not necessary
and what is potential is possible), affirmative statements will all
convert in a manner similar to those described. For if it is possible
that all or some B is A, it will be possible that some A is B. For
if that were not possible, then no B could possibly be A. This has
been already proved. But in negative statements the case is different.
Whatever is said to be possible, either because B necessarily is A,
or because B is not necessarily A, admits of conversion like other
negative statements, e.g. if one should say, it is possible that man
is not horse, or that no garment is white. For in the former case
the one term necessarily does not belong to the other; in the latter
there is no necessity that it should: and the premiss converts like
other negative statements. For if it is possible for no man to be
a horse, it is also admissible for no horse to be a man; and if it
is admissible for no garment to be white, it is also admissible for
nothing white to be a garment. For if any white thing must be a garment,
then some garment will necessarily be white. This has been already
proved. The particular negative also must be treated like those dealt
with above. But if anything is said to be possible because it is the
general rule and natural (and it is in this way we define the possible),
the negative premisses can no longer be converted like the simple
negatives; the universal negative premiss does not convert, and the
particular does. This will be plain when we speak about the possible.
At present we may take this much as clear in addition to what has
been said: the statement that it is possible that no B is A or some
B is not A is affirmative in form: for the expression 'is possible'
ranks along with 'is', and 'is' makes an affirmation always and in
every case, whatever the terms to which it is added, in predication,
e.g. 'it is not-good' or 'it is not-white' or in a word 'it is not-this'.
But this also will be proved in the sequel. In conversion these premisses
will behave like the other affirmative propositions. 

Part 4

After these distinctions we now state by what means, when, and how
every syllogism is produced; subsequently we must speak of demonstration.
Syllogism should be discussed before demonstration because syllogism
is the general: the demonstration is a sort of syllogism, but not
every syllogism is a demonstration. 

Whenever three terms are so related to one another that the last is
contained in the middle as in a whole, and the middle is either contained
in, or excluded from, the first as in or from a whole, the extremes
must be related by a perfect syllogism. I call that term middle which
is itself contained in another and contains another in itself: in
position also this comes in the middle. By extremes I mean both that
term which is itself contained in another and that in which another
is contained. If A is predicated of all B, and B of all C, A must
be predicated of all C: we have already explained what we mean by
'predicated of all'. Similarly also, if A is predicated of no B, and
B of all C, it is necessary that no C will be A. 

But if the first term belongs to all the middle, but the middle to
none of the last term, there will be no syllogism in respect of the
extremes; for nothing necessary follows from the terms being so related;
for it is possible that the first should belong either to all or to
none of the last, so that neither a particular nor a universal conclusion
is necessary. But if there is no necessary consequence, there cannot
be a syllogism by means of these premisses. As an example of a universal
affirmative relation between the extremes we may take the terms animal,
man, horse; of a universal negative relation, the terms animal, man,
stone. Nor again can syllogism be formed when neither the first term
belongs to any of the middle, nor the middle to any of the last. As
an example of a positive relation between the extremes take the terms
science, line, medicine: of a negative relation science, line, unit.

If then the terms are universally related, it is clear in this figure
when a syllogism will be possible and when not, and that if a syllogism
is possible the terms must be related as described, and if they are
so related there will be a syllogism. 

But if one term is related universally, the other in part only, to
its subject, there must be a perfect syllogism whenever universality
is posited with reference to the major term either affirmatively or
negatively, and particularity with reference to the minor term affirmatively:
but whenever the universality is posited in relation to the minor
term, or the terms are related in any other way, a syllogism is impossible.
I call that term the major in which the middle is contained and that
term the minor which comes under the middle. Let all B be A and some
C be B. Then if 'predicated of all' means what was said above, it
is necessary that some C is A. And if no B is A but some C is B, it
is necessary that some C is not A. The meaning of 'predicated of none'
has also been defined. So there will be a perfect syllogism. This
holds good also if the premiss BC should be indefinite, provided that
it is affirmative: for we shall have the same syllogism whether the
premiss is indefinite or particular. 

But if the universality is posited with respect to the minor term
either affirmatively or negatively, a syllogism will not be possible,
whether the major premiss is positive or negative, indefinite or particular:
e.g. if some B is or is not A, and all C is B. As an example of a
positive relation between the extremes take the terms good, state,
wisdom: of a negative relation, good, state, ignorance. Again if no
C is B, but some B is or is not A or not every B is A, there cannot
be a syllogism. Take the terms white, horse, swan: white, horse, raven.
The same terms may be taken also if the premiss BA is indefinite.

Nor when the major premiss is universal, whether affirmative or negative,
and the minor premiss is negative and particular, can there be a syllogism,
whether the minor premiss be indefinite or particular: e.g. if all
B is A and some C is not B, or if not all C is B. For the major term
may be predicable both of all and of none of the minor, to some of
which the middle term cannot be attributed. Suppose the terms are
animal, man, white: next take some of the white things of which man
is not predicated-swan and snow: animal is predicated of all of the
one, but of none of the other. Consequently there cannot be a syllogism.
Again let no B be A, but let some C not be B. Take the terms inanimate,
man, white: then take some white things of which man is not predicated-swan
and snow: the term inanimate is predicated of all of the one, of none
of the other. 

Further since it is indefinite to say some C is not B, and it is true
that some C is not B, whether no C is B, or not all C is B, and since
if terms are assumed such that no C is B, no syllogism follows (this
has already been stated) it is clear that this arrangement of terms
will not afford a syllogism: otherwise one would have been possible
with a universal negative minor premiss. A similar proof may also
be given if the universal premiss is negative. 

Nor can there in any way be a syllogism if both the relations of subject
and predicate are particular, either positively or negatively, or
the one negative and the other affirmative, or one indefinite and
the other definite, or both indefinite. Terms common to all the above
are animal, white, horse: animal, white, stone. 

It is clear then from what has been said that if there is a syllogism
in this figure with a particular conclusion, the terms must be related
as we have stated: if they are related otherwise, no syllogism is
possible anyhow. It is evident also that all the syllogisms in this
figure are perfect (for they are all completed by means of the premisses
originally taken) and that all conclusions are proved by this figure,
viz. universal and particular, affirmative and negative. Such a figure
I call the first. 

Part 5

Whenever the same thing belongs to all of one subject, and to none
of another, or to all of each subject or to none of either, I call
such a figure the second; by middle term in it I mean that which is
predicated of both subjects, by extremes the terms of which this is
said, by major extreme that which lies near the middle, by minor that
which is further away from the middle. The middle term stands outside
the extremes, and is first in position. A syllogism cannot be perfect
anyhow in this figure, but it may be valid whether the terms are related
universally or not. 

If then the terms are related universally a syllogism will be possible,
whenever the middle belongs to all of one subject and to none of another
(it does not matter which has the negative relation), but in no other
way. Let M be predicated of no N, but of all O. Since, then, the negative
relation is convertible, N will belong to no M: but M was assumed
to belong to all O: consequently N will belong to no O. This has already
been proved. Again if M belongs to all N, but to no O, then N will
belong to no O. For if M belongs to no O, O belongs to no M: but M
(as was said) belongs to all N: O then will belong to no N: for the
first figure has again been formed. But since the negative relation
is convertible, N will belong to no O. Thus it will be the same syllogism
that proves both conclusions. 

It is possible to prove these results also by reductio ad impossibile.

It is clear then that a syllogism is formed when the terms are so
related, but not a perfect syllogism; for necessity is not perfectly
established merely from the original premisses; others also are needed.

But if M is predicated of every N and O, there cannot be a syllogism.
Terms to illustrate a positive relation between the extremes are substance,
animal, man; a negative relation, substance, animal, number-substance
being the middle term. 

Nor is a syllogism possible when M is predicated neither of any N
nor of any O. Terms to illustrate a positive relation are line, animal,
man: a negative relation, line, animal, stone. 

It is clear then that if a syllogism is formed when the terms are
universally related, the terms must be related as we stated at the
outset: for if they are otherwise related no necessary consequence
follows. 

If the middle term is related universally to one of the extremes,
a particular negative syllogism must result whenever the middle term
is related universally to the major whether positively or negatively,
and particularly to the minor and in a manner opposite to that of
the universal statement: by 'an opposite manner' I mean, if the universal
statement is negative, the particular is affirmative: if the universal
is affirmative, the particular is negative. For if M belongs to no
N, but to some O, it is necessary that N does not belong to some O.
For since the negative statement is convertible, N will belong to
no M: but M was admitted to belong to some O: therefore N will not
belong to some O: for the result is reached by means of the first
figure. Again if M belongs to all N, but not to some O, it is necessary
that N does not belong to some O: for if N belongs to all O, and M
is predicated also of all N, M must belong to all O: but we assumed
that M does not belong to some O. And if M belongs to all N but not
to all O, we shall conclude that N does not belong to all O: the proof
is the same as the above. But if M is predicated of all O, but not
of all N, there will be no syllogism. Take the terms animal, substance,
raven; animal, white, raven. Nor will there be a conclusion when M
is predicated of no O, but of some N. Terms to illustrate a positive
relation between the extremes are animal, substance, unit: a negative
relation, animal, substance, science. 

If then the universal statement is opposed to the particular, we have
stated when a syllogism will be possible and when not: but if the
premisses are similar in form, I mean both negative or both affirmative,
a syllogism will not be possible anyhow. First let them be negative,
and let the major premiss be universal, e.g. let M belong to no N,
and not to some O. It is possible then for N to belong either to all
O or to no O. Terms to illustrate the negative relation are black,
snow, animal. But it is not possible to find terms of which the extremes
are related positively and universally, if M belongs to some O, and
does not belong to some O. For if N belonged to all O, but M to no
N, then M would belong to no O: but we assumed that it belongs to
some O. In this way then it is not admissible to take terms: our point
must be proved from the indefinite nature of the particular statement.
For since it is true that M does not belong to some O, even if it
belongs to no O, and since if it belongs to no O a syllogism is (as
we have seen) not possible, clearly it will not be possible now either.

Again let the premisses be affirmative, and let the major premiss
as before be universal, e.g. let M belong to all N and to some O.
It is possible then for N to belong to all O or to no O. Terms to
illustrate the negative relation are white, swan, stone. But it is
not possible to take terms to illustrate the universal affirmative
relation, for the reason already stated: the point must be proved
from the indefinite nature of the particular statement. But if the
minor premiss is universal, and M belongs to no O, and not to some
N, it is possible for N to belong either to all O or to no O. Terms
for the positive relation are white, animal, raven: for the negative
relation, white, stone, raven. If the premisses are affirmative, terms
for the negative relation are white, animal, snow; for the positive
relation, white, animal, swan. Evidently then, whenever the premisses
are similar in form, and one is universal, the other particular, a
syllogism can, not be formed anyhow. Nor is one possible if the middle
term belongs to some of each of the extremes, or does not belong to
some of either, or belongs to some of the one, not to some of the
other, or belongs to neither universally, or is related to them indefinitely.
Common terms for all the above are white, animal, man: white, animal,
inanimate. It is clear then from what has been said that if the terms
are related to one another in the way stated, a syllogism results
of necessity; and if there is a syllogism, the terms must be so related.
But it is evident also that all the syllogisms in this figure are
imperfect: for all are made perfect by certain supplementary statements,
which either are contained in the terms of necessity or are assumed
as hypotheses, i.e. when we prove per impossibile. And it is evident
that an affirmative conclusion is not attained by means of this figure,
but all are negative, whether universal or particular. 

Part 6

But if one term belongs to all, and another to none, of a third, or
if both belong to all, or to none, of it, I call such a figure the
third; by middle term in it I mean that of which both the predicates
are predicated, by extremes I mean the predicates, by the major extreme
that which is further from the middle, by the minor that which is
nearer to it. The middle term stands outside the extremes, and is
last in position. A syllogism cannot be perfect in this figure either,
but it may be valid whether the terms are related universally or not
to the middle term. 

If they are universal, whenever both P and R belong to S, it follows
that P will necessarily belong to some R. For, since the affirmative
statement is convertible, S will belong to some R: consequently since
P belongs to all S, and S to some R, P must belong to some R: for
a syllogism in the first figure is produced. It is possible to demonstrate
this also per impossibile and by exposition. For if both P and R belong
to all S, should one of the Ss, e.g. N, be taken, both P and R will
belong to this, and thus P will belong to some R. 

If R belongs to all S, and P to no S, there will be a syllogism to
prove that P will necessarily not belong to some R. This may be demonstrated
in the same way as before by converting the premiss RS. It might be
proved also per impossibile, as in the former cases. But if R belongs
to no S, P to all S, there will be no syllogism. Terms for the positive
relation are animal, horse, man: for the negative relation animal,
inanimate, man. 

Nor can there be a syllogism when both terms are asserted of no S.
Terms for the positive relation are animal, horse, inanimate; for
the negative relation man, horse, inanimate-inanimate being the middle
term. 

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be possible
and when not, if the terms are related universally. For whenever both
the terms are affirmative, there will be a syllogism to prove that
one extreme belongs to some of the other; but when they are negative,
no syllogism will be possible. But when one is negative, the other
affirmative, if the major is negative, the minor affirmative, there
will be a syllogism to prove that the one extreme does not belong
to some of the other: but if the relation is reversed, no syllogism
will be possible. If one term is related universally to the middle,
the other in part only, when both are affirmative there must be a
syllogism, no matter which of the premisses is universal. For if R
belongs to all S, P to some S, P must belong to some R. For since
the affirmative statement is convertible S will belong to some P:
consequently since R belongs to all S, and S to some P, R must also
belong to some P: therefore P must belong to some R. 

Again if R belongs to some S, and P to all S, P must belong to some
R. This may be demonstrated in the same way as the preceding. And
it is possible to demonstrate it also per impossibile and by exposition,
as in the former cases. But if one term is affirmative, the other
negative, and if the affirmative is universal, a syllogism will be
possible whenever the minor term is affirmative. For if R belongs
to all S, but P does not belong to some S, it is necessary that P
does not belong to some R. For if P belongs to all R, and R belongs
to all S, then P will belong to all S: but we assumed that it did
not. Proof is possible also without reduction ad impossibile, if one
of the Ss be taken to which P does not belong. 

But whenever the major is affirmative, no syllogism will be possible,
e.g. if P belongs to all S and R does not belong to some S. Terms
for the universal affirmative relation are animate, man, animal. For
the universal negative relation it is not possible to get terms, if
R belongs to some S, and does not belong to some S. For if P belongs
to all S, and R to some S, then P will belong to some R: but we assumed
that it belongs to no R. We must put the matter as before.' Since
the expression 'it does not belong to some' is indefinite, it may
be used truly of that also which belongs to none. But if R belongs
to no S, no syllogism is possible, as has been shown. Clearly then
no syllogism will be possible here. 

But if the negative term is universal, whenever the major is negative
and the minor affirmative there will be a syllogism. For if P belongs
to no S, and R belongs to some S, P will not belong to some R: for
we shall have the first figure again, if the premiss RS is converted.

But when the minor is negative, there will be no syllogism. Terms
for the positive relation are animal, man, wild: for the negative
relation, animal, science, wild-the middle in both being the term
wild. 

Nor is a syllogism possible when both are stated in the negative,
but one is universal, the other particular. When the minor is related
universally to the middle, take the terms animal, science, wild; animal,
man, wild. When the major is related universally to the middle, take
as terms for a negative relation raven, snow, white. For a positive
relation terms cannot be found, if R belongs to some S, and does not
belong to some S. For if P belongs to all R, and R to some S, then
P belongs to some S: but we assumed that it belongs to no S. Our point,
then, must be proved from the indefinite nature of the particular
statement. 

Nor is a syllogism possible anyhow, if each of the extremes belongs
to some of the middle or does not belong, or one belongs and the other
does not to some of the middle, or one belongs to some of the middle,
the other not to all, or if the premisses are indefinite. Common terms
for all are animal, man, white: animal, inanimate, white.

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be possible,
and when not; and that if the terms are as stated, a syllogism results
of necessity, and if there is a syllogism, the terms must be so related.
It is clear also that all the syllogisms in this figure are imperfect
(for all are made perfect by certain supplementary assumptions), and
that it will not be possible to reach a universal conclusion by means
of this figure, whether negative or affirmative. 

Part 7

It is evident also that in all the figures, whenever a proper syllogism
does not result, if both the terms are affirmative or negative nothing
necessary follows at all, but if one is affirmative, the other negative,
and if the negative is stated universally, a syllogism always results
relating the minor to the major term, e.g. if A belongs to all or
some B, and B belongs to no C: for if the premisses are converted
it is necessary that C does not belong to some A. Similarly also in
the other figures: a syllogism always results by means of conversion.
It is evident also that the substitution of an indefinite for a particular
affirmative will effect the same syllogism in all the figures.

It is clear too that all the imperfect syllogisms are made perfect
by means of the first figure. For all are brought to a conclusion
either ostensively or per impossibile. In both ways the first figure
is formed: if they are made perfect ostensively, because (as we saw)
all are brought to a conclusion by means of conversion, and conversion
produces the first figure: if they are proved per impossibile, because
on the assumption of the false statement the syllogism comes about
by means of the first figure, e.g. in the last figure, if A and B
belong to all C, it follows that A belongs to some B: for if A belonged
to no B, and B belongs to all C, A would belong to no C: but (as we
stated) it belongs to all C. Similarly also with the rest.

It is possible also to reduce all syllogisms to the universal syllogisms
in the first figure. Those in the second figure are clearly made perfect
by these, though not all in the same way; the universal syllogisms
are made perfect by converting the negative premiss, each of the particular
syllogisms by reductio ad impossibile. In the first figure particular
syllogisms are indeed made perfect by themselves, but it is possible
also to prove them by means of the second figure, reducing them ad
impossibile, e.g. if A belongs to all B, and B to some C, it follows
that A belongs to some C. For if it belonged to no C, and belongs
to all B, then B will belong to no C: this we know by means of the
second figure. Similarly also demonstration will be possible in the
case of the negative. For if A belongs to no B, and B belongs to some
C, A will not belong to some C: for if it belonged to all C, and belongs
to no B, then B will belong to no C: and this (as we saw) is the middle
figure. Consequently, since all syllogisms in the middle figure can
be reduced to universal syllogisms in the first figure, and since
particular syllogisms in the first figure can be reduced to syllogisms
in the middle figure, it is clear that particular syllogisms can be
reduced to universal syllogisms in the first figure. Syllogisms in
the third figure, if the terms are universal, are directly made perfect
by means of those syllogisms; but, when one of the premisses is particular,
by means of the particular syllogisms in the first figure: and these
(we have seen) may be reduced to the universal syllogisms in the first
figure: consequently also the particular syllogisms in the third figure
may be so reduced. It is clear then that all syllogisms may be reduced
to the universal syllogisms in the first figure. 

We have stated then how syllogisms which prove that something belongs
or does not belong to something else are constituted, both how syllogisms
of the same figure are constituted in themselves, and how syllogisms
of different figures are related to one another. 

Part 8

Since there is a difference according as something belongs, necessarily
belongs, or may belong to something else (for many things belong indeed,
but not necessarily, others neither necessarily nor indeed at all,
but it is possible for them to belong), it is clear that there will
be different syllogisms to prove each of these relations, and syllogisms
with differently related terms, one syllogism concluding from what
is necessary, another from what is, a third from what is possible.

There is hardly any difference between syllogisms from necessary premisses
and syllogisms from premisses which merely assert. When the terms
are put in the same way, then, whether something belongs or necessarily
belongs (or does not belong) to something else, a syllogism will or
will not result alike in both cases, the only difference being the
addition of the expression 'necessarily' to the terms. For the negative
statement is convertible alike in both cases, and we should give the
same account of the expressions 'to be contained in something as in
a whole' and 'to be predicated of all of something'. With the exceptions
to be made below, the conclusion will be proved to be necessary by
means of conversion, in the same manner as in the case of simple predication.
But in the middle figure when the universal statement is affirmative,
and the particular negative, and again in the third figure when the
universal is affirmative and the particular negative, the demonstration
will not take the same form, but it is necessary by the 'exposition'
of a part of the subject of the particular negative proposition, to
which the predicate does not belong, to make the syllogism in reference
to this: with terms so chosen the conclusion will necessarily follow.
But if the relation is necessary in respect of the part taken, it
must hold of some of that term in which this part is included: for
the part taken is just some of that. And each of the resulting syllogisms
is in the appropriate figure. 

Part 9

It happens sometimes also that when one premiss is necessary the conclusion
is necessary, not however when either premiss is necessary, but only
when the major is, e.g. if A is taken as necessarily belonging or
not belonging to B, but B is taken as simply belonging to C: for if
the premisses are taken in this way, A will necessarily belong or
not belong to C. For since necessarily belongs, or does not belong,
to every B, and since C is one of the Bs, it is clear that for C also
the positive or the negative relation to A will hold necessarily.
But if the major premiss is not necessary, but the minor is necessary,
the conclusion will not be necessary. For if it were, it would result
both through the first figure and through the third that A belongs
necessarily to some B. But this is false; for B may be such that it
is possible that A should belong to none of it. Further, an example
also makes it clear that the conclusion not be necessary, e.g. if
A were movement, B animal, C man: man is an animal necessarily, but
an animal does not move necessarily, nor does man. Similarly also
if the major premiss is negative; for the proof is the same.

In particular syllogisms, if the universal premiss is necessary, then
the conclusion will be necessary; but if the particular, the conclusion
will not be necessary, whether the universal premiss is negative or
affirmative. First let the universal be necessary, and let A belong
to all B necessarily, but let B simply belong to some C: it is necessary
then that A belongs to some C necessarily: for C falls under B, and
A was assumed to belong necessarily to all B. Similarly also if the
syllogism should be negative: for the proof will be the same. But
if the particular premiss is necessary, the conclusion will not be
necessary: for from the denial of such a conclusion nothing impossible
results, just as it does not in the universal syllogisms. The same
is true of negative syllogisms. Try the terms movement, animal, white.

Part 10

In the second figure, if the negative premiss is necessary, then the
conclusion will be necessary, but if the affirmative, not necessary.
First let the negative be necessary; let A be possible of no B, and
simply belong to C. Since then the negative statement is convertible,
B is possible of no A. But A belongs to all C; consequently B is possible
of no C. For C falls under A. The same result would be obtained if
the minor premiss were negative: for if A is possible be of no C,
C is possible of no A: but A belongs to all B, consequently C is possible
of none of the Bs: for again we have obtained the first figure. Neither
then is B possible of C: for conversion is possible without modifying
the relation. 

But if the affirmative premiss is necessary, the conclusion will not
be necessary. Let A belong to all B necessarily, but to no C simply.
If then the negative premiss is converted, the first figure results.
But it has been proved in the case of the first figure that if the
negative major premiss is not necessary the conclusion will not be
necessary either. Therefore the same result will obtain here. Further,
if the conclusion is necessary, it follows that C necessarily does
not belong to some A. For if B necessarily belongs to no C, C will
necessarily belong to no B. But B at any rate must belong to some
A, if it is true (as was assumed) that A necessarily belongs to all
B. Consequently it is necessary that C does not belong to some A.
But nothing prevents such an A being taken that it is possible for
C to belong to all of it. Further one might show by an exposition
of terms that the conclusion is not necessary without qualification,
though it is a necessary conclusion from the premisses. For example
let A be animal, B man, C white, and let the premisses be assumed
to correspond to what we had before: it is possible that animal should
belong to nothing white. Man then will not belong to anything white,
but not necessarily: for it is possible for man to be born white,
not however so long as animal belongs to nothing white. Consequently
under these conditions the conclusion will be necessary, but it is
not necessary without qualification. 

Similar results will obtain also in particular syllogisms. For whenever
the negative premiss is both universal and necessary, then the conclusion
will be necessary: but whenever the affirmative premiss is universal,
the negative particular, the conclusion will not be necessary. First
then let the negative premiss be both universal and necessary: let
it be possible for no B that A should belong to it, and let A simply
belong to some C. Since the negative statement is convertible, it
will be possible for no A that B should belong to it: but A belongs
to some C; consequently B necessarily does not belong to some of the
Cs. Again let the affirmative premiss be both universal and necessary,
and let the major premiss be affirmative. If then A necessarily belongs
to all B, but does not belong to some C, it is clear that B will not
belong to some C, but not necessarily. For the same terms can be used
to demonstrate the point, which were used in the universal syllogisms.
Nor again, if the negative statement is necessary but particular,
will the conclusion be necessary. The point can be demonstrated by
means of the same terms. 

Part 11

In the last figure when the terms are related universally to the middle,
and both premisses are affirmative, if one of the two is necessary,
then the conclusion will be necessary. But if one is negative, the
other affirmative, whenever the negative is necessary the conclusion
also will be necessary, but whenever the affirmative is necessary
the conclusion will not be necessary. First let both the premisses
be affirmative, and let A and B belong to all C, and let Ac be necessary.
Since then B belongs to all C, C also will belong to some B, because
the universal is convertible into the particular: consequently if
A belongs necessarily to all C, and C belongs to some B, it is necessary
that A should belong to some B also. For B is under C. The first figure
then is formed. A similar proof will be given also if BC is necessary.
For C is convertible with some A: consequently if B belongs necessarily
to all C, it will belong necessarily also to some A. 

Again let AC be negative, BC affirmative, and let the negative premiss
be necessary. Since then C is convertible with some B, but A necessarily
belongs to no C, A will necessarily not belong to some B either: for
B is under C. But if the affirmative is necessary, the conclusion
will not be necessary. For suppose BC is affirmative and necessary,
while AC is negative and not necessary. Since then the affirmative
is convertible, C also will belong to some B necessarily: consequently
if A belongs to none of the Cs, while C belongs to some of the Bs,
A will not belong to some of the Bs-but not of necessity; for it has
been proved, in the case of the first figure, that if the negative
premiss is not necessary, neither will the conclusion be necessary.
Further, the point may be made clear by considering the terms. Let
the term A be 'good', let that which B signifies be 'animal', let
the term C be 'horse'. It is possible then that the term good should
belong to no horse, and it is necessary that the term animal should
belong to every horse: but it is not necessary that some animal should
not be good, since it is possible for every animal to be good. Or
if that is not possible, take as the term 'awake' or 'asleep': for
every animal can accept these. 

If, then, the premisses are universal, we have stated when the conclusion
will be necessary. But if one premiss is universal, the other particular,
and if both are affirmative, whenever the universal is necessary the
conclusion also must be necessary. The demonstration is the same as
before; for the particular affirmative also is convertible. If then
it is necessary that B should belong to all C, and A falls under C,
it is necessary that B should belong to some A. But if B must belong
to some A, then A must belong to some B: for conversion is possible.
Similarly also if AC should be necessary and universal: for B falls
under C. But if the particular premiss is necessary, the conclusion
will not be necessary. Let the premiss BC be both particular and necessary,
and let A belong to all C, not however necessarily. If the proposition
BC is converted the first figure is formed, and the universal premiss
is not necessary, but the particular is necessary. But when the premisses
were thus, the conclusion (as we proved was not necessary: consequently
it is not here either. Further, the point is clear if we look at the
terms. Let A be waking, B biped, and C animal. It is necessary that
B should belong to some C, but it is possible for A to belong to C,
and that A should belong to B is not necessary. For there is no necessity
that some biped should be asleep or awake. Similarly and by means
of the same terms proof can be made, should the proposition Ac be
both particular and necessary. 

But if one premiss is affirmative, the other negative, whenever the
universal is both negative and necessary the conclusion also will
be necessary. For if it is not possible that A should belong to any
C, but B belongs to some C, it is necessary that A should not belong
to some B. But whenever the affirmative proposition is necessary,
whether universal or particular, or the negative is particular, the
conclusion will not be necessary. The proof of this by reduction will
be the same as before; but if terms are wanted, when the universal
affirmative is necessary, take the terms 'waking'-'animal'-'man',
'man' being middle, and when the affirmative is particular and necessary,
take the terms 'waking'-'animal'-'white': for it is necessary that
animal should belong to some white thing, but it is possible that
waking should belong to none, and it is not necessary that waking
should not belong to some animal. But when the negative proposition
being particular is necessary, take the terms 'biped', 'moving', 'animal',
'animal' being middle. 

Part 12

It is clear then that a simple conclusion is not reached unless both
premisses are simple assertions, but a necessary conclusion is possible
although one only of the premisses is necessary. But in both cases,
whether the syllogisms are affirmative or negative, it is necessary
that one premiss should be similar to the conclusion. I mean by 'similar',
if the conclusion is a simple assertion, the premiss must be simple;
if the conclusion is necessary, the premiss must be necessary. Consequently
this also is clear, that the conclusion will be neither necessary
nor simple unless a necessary or simple premiss is assumed.

Part 13

Perhaps enough has been said about the proof of necessity, how it
comes about and how it differs from the proof of a simple statement.
We proceed to discuss that which is possible, when and how and by
what means it can be proved. I use the terms 'to be possible' and
'the possible' of that which is not necessary but, being assumed,
results in nothing impossible. We say indeed ambiguously of the necessary
that it is possible. But that my definition of the possible is correct
is clear from the phrases by which we deny or on the contrary affirm
possibility. For the expressions 'it is not possible to belong', 'it
is impossible to belong', and 'it is necessary not to belong' are
either identical or follow from one another; consequently their opposites
also, 'it is possible to belong', 'it is not impossible to belong',
and 'it is not necessary not to belong', will either be identical
or follow from one another. For of everything the affirmation or the
denial holds good. That which is possible then will be not necessary
and that which is not necessary will be possible. It results that
all premisses in the mode of possibility are convertible into one
another. I mean not that the affirmative are convertible into the
negative, but that those which are affirmative in form admit of conversion
by opposition, e.g. 'it is possible to belong' may be converted into
'it is possible not to belong', and 'it is possible for A to belong
to all B' into 'it is possible for A to belong to no B' or 'not to
all B', and 'it is possible for A to belong to some B' into 'it is
possible for A not to belong to some B'. And similarly the other propositions
in this mode can be converted. For since that which is possible is
not necessary, and that which is not necessary may possibly not belong,
it is clear that if it is possible that A should belong to B, it is
possible also that it should not belong to B: and if it is possible
that it should belong to all, it is also possible that it should not
belong to all. The same holds good in the case of particular affirmations:
for the proof is identical. And such premisses are affirmative and
not negative; for 'to be possible' is in the same rank as 'to be',
as was said above. 

Having made these distinctions we next point out that the expression
'to be possible' is used in two ways. In one it means to happen generally
and fall short of necessity, e.g. man's turning grey or growing or
decaying, or generally what naturally belongs to a thing (for this
has not its necessity unbroken, since man's existence is not continuous
for ever, although if a man does exist, it comes about either necessarily
or generally). In another sense the expression means the indefinite,
which can be both thus and not thus, e.g. an animal's walking or an
earthquake's taking place while it is walking, or generally what happens
by chance: for none of these inclines by nature in the one way more
than in the opposite. 

That which is possible in each of its two senses is convertible into
its opposite, not however in the same way: but what is natural is
convertible because it does not necessarily belong (for in this sense
it is possible that a man should not grow grey) and what is indefinite
is convertible because it inclines this way no more than that. Science
and demonstrative syllogism are not concerned with things which are
indefinite, because the middle term is uncertain; but they are concerned
with things that are natural, and as a rule arguments and inquiries
are made about things which are possible in this sense. Syllogisms
indeed can be made about the former, but it is unusual at any rate
to inquire about them. 

These matters will be treated more definitely in the sequel; our business
at present is to state the moods and nature of the syllogism made
from possible premisses. The expression 'it is possible for this to
belong to that' may be understood in two senses: 'that' may mean either
that to which 'that' belongs or that to which it may belong; for the
expression 'A is possible of the subject of B' means that it is possible
either of that of which B is stated or of that of which B may possibly
be stated. It makes no difference whether we say, A is possible of
the subject of B, or all B admits of A. It is clear then that the
expression 'A may possibly belong to all B' might be used in two senses.
First then we must state the nature and characteristics of the syllogism
which arises if B is possible of the subject of C, and A is possible
of the subject of B. For thus both premisses are assumed in the mode
of possibility; but whenever A is possible of that of which B is true,
one premiss is a simple assertion, the other a problematic. Consequently
we must start from premisses which are similar in form, as in the
other cases. 

Part 14

Whenever A may possibly belong to all B, and B to all C, there will
be a perfect syllogism to prove that A may possibly belong to all
C. This is clear from the definition: for it was in this way that
we explained 'to be possible for one term to belong to all of another'.
Similarly if it is possible for A to belong no B, and for B to belong
to all C, then it is possible for A to belong to no C. For the statement
that it is possible for A not to belong to that of which B may be
true means (as we saw) that none of those things which can possibly
fall under the term B is left out of account. But whenever A may belong
to all B, and B may belong to no C, then indeed no syllogism results
from the premisses assumed, but if the premiss BC is converted after
the manner of problematic propositions, the same syllogism results
as before. For since it is possible that B should belong to no C,
it is possible also that it should belong to all C. This has been
stated above. Consequently if B is possible for all C, and A is possible
for all B, the same syllogism again results. Similarly if in both
the premisses the negative is joined with 'it is possible': e.g. if
A may belong to none of the Bs, and B to none of the Cs. No syllogism
results from the assumed premisses, but if they are converted we shall
have the same syllogism as before. It is clear then that if the minor
premiss is negative, or if both premisses are negative, either no
syllogism results, or if one it is not perfect. For the necessity
results from the conversion. 

But if one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, when
the major premiss is universal there will be a perfect syllogism.
For if A is possible for all B, and B for some C, then A is possible
for some C. This is clear from the definition of being possible. Again
if A may belong to no B, and B may belong to some of the Cs, it is
necessary that A may possibly not belong to some of the Cs. The proof
is the same as above. But if the particular premiss is negative, and
the universal is affirmative, the major still being universal and
the minor particular, e.g. A is possible for all B, B may possibly
not belong to some C, then a clear syllogism does not result from
the assumed premisses, but if the particular premiss is converted
and it is laid down that B possibly may belong to some C, we shall
have the same conclusion as before, as in the cases given at the beginning.

But if the major premiss is the minor universal, whether both are
affirmative, or negative, or different in quality, or if both are
indefinite or particular, in no way will a syllogism be possible.
For nothing prevents B from reaching beyond A, so that as predicates
cover unequal areas. Let C be that by which B extends beyond A. To
C it is not possible that A should belong-either to all or to none
or to some or not to some, since premisses in the mode of possibility
are convertible and it is possible for B to belong to more things
than A can. Further, this is obvious if we take terms; for if the
premisses are as assumed, the major term is both possible for none
of the minor and must belong to all of it. Take as terms common to
all the cases under consideration 'animal'-'white'-'man', where the
major belongs necessarily to the minor; 'animal'-'white'-'garment',
where it is not possible that the major should belong to the minor.
It is clear then that if the terms are related in this manner, no
syllogism results. For every syllogism proves that something belongs
either simply or necessarily or possibly. It is clear that there is
no proof of the first or of the second. For the affirmative is destroyed
by the negative, and the negative by the affirmative. There remains
the proof of possibility. But this is impossible. For it has been
proved that if the terms are related in this manner it is both necessary
that the major should belong to all the minor and not possible that
it should belong to any. Consequently there cannot be a syllogism
to prove the possibility; for the necessary (as we stated) is not
possible. 

It is clear that if the terms are universal in possible premisses
a syllogism always results in the first figure, whether they are affirmative
or negative, only a perfect syllogism results in the first case, an
imperfect in the second. But possibility must be understood according
to the definition laid down, not as covering necessity. This is sometimes
forgotten. 

Part 15

If one premiss is a simple proposition, the other a problematic, whenever
the major premiss indicates possibility all the syllogisms will be
perfect and establish possibility in the sense defined; but whenever
the minor premiss indicates possibility all the syllogisms will be
imperfect, and those which are negative will establish not possibility
according to the definition, but that the major does not necessarily
belong to any, or to all, of the minor. For if this is so, we say
it is possible that it should belong to none or not to all. Let A
be possible for all B, and let B belong to all C. Since C falls under
B, and A is possible for all B, clearly it is possible for all C also.
So a perfect syllogism results. Likewise if the premiss AB is negative,
and the premiss BC is affirmative, the former stating possible, the
latter simple attribution, a perfect syllogism results proving that
A possibly belongs to no C. 

It is clear that perfect syllogisms result if the minor premiss states
simple belonging: but that syllogisms will result if the modality
of the premisses is reversed, must be proved per impossibile. At the
same time it will be evident that they are imperfect: for the proof
proceeds not from the premisses assumed. First we must state that
if B's being follows necessarily from A's being, B's possibility will
follow necessarily from A's possibility. Suppose, the terms being
so related, that A is possible, and B is impossible. If then that
which is possible, when it is possible for it to be, might happen,
and if that which is impossible, when it is impossible, could not
happen, and if at the same time A is possible and B impossible, it
would be possible for A to happen without B, and if to happen, then
to be. For that which has happened, when it has happened, is. But
we must take the impossible and the possible not only in the sphere
of becoming, but also in the spheres of truth and predicability, and
the various other spheres in which we speak of the possible: for it
will be alike in all. Further we must understand the statement that
B's being depends on A's being, not as meaning that if some single
thing A is, B will be: for nothing follows of necessity from the being
of some one thing, but from two at least, i.e. when the premisses
are related in the manner stated to be that of the syllogism. For
if C is predicated of D, and D of F, then C is necessarily predicated
of F. And if each is possible, the conclusion also is possible. If
then, for example, one should indicate the premisses by A, and the
conclusion by B, it would not only result that if A is necessary B
is necessary, but also that if A is possible, B is possible.

Since this is proved it is evident that if a false and not impossible
assumption is made, the consequence of the assumption will also be
false and not impossible: e.g. if A is false, but not impossible,
and if B is the consequence of A, B also will be false but not impossible.
For since it has been proved that if B's being is the consequence
of A's being, then B's possibility will follow from A's possibility
(and A is assumed to be possible), consequently B will be possible:
for if it were impossible, the same thing would at the same time be
possible and impossible. 

Since we have defined these points, let A belong to all B, and B be
possible for all C: it is necessary then that should be a possible
attribute for all C. Suppose that it is not possible, but assume that
B belongs to all C: this is false but not impossible. If then A is
not possible for C but B belongs to all C, then A is not possible
for all B: for a syllogism is formed in the third degree. But it was
assumed that A is a possible attribute for all B. It is necessary
then that A is possible for all C. For though the assumption we made
is false and not impossible, the conclusion is impossible. It is possible
also in the first figure to bring about the impossibility, by assuming
that B belongs to C. For if B belongs to all C, and A is possible
for all B, then A would be possible for all C. But the assumption
was made that A is not possible for all C. 

We must understand 'that which belongs to all' with no limitation
in respect of time, e.g. to the present or to a particular period,
but simply without qualification. For it is by the help of such premisses
that we make syllogisms, since if the premiss is understood with reference
to the present moment, there cannot be a syllogism. For nothing perhaps
prevents 'man' belonging at a particular time to everything that is
moving, i.e. if nothing else were moving: but 'moving' is possible
for every horse; yet 'man' is possible for no horse. Further let the
major term be 'animal', the middle 'moving', the the minor 'man'.
The premisses then will be as before, but the conclusion necessary,
not possible. For man is necessarily animal. It is clear then that
the universal must be understood simply, without limitation in respect
of time. 

Again let the premiss AB be universal and negative, and assume that
A belongs to no B, but B possibly belongs to all C. These propositions
being laid down, it is necessary that A possibly belongs to no C.
Suppose that it cannot belong, and that B belongs to C, as above.
It is necessary then that A belongs to some B: for we have a syllogism
in the third figure: but this is impossible. Thus it will be possible
for A to belong to no C; for if at is supposed false, the consequence
is an impossible one. This syllogism then does not establish that
which is possible according to the definition, but that which does
not necessarily belong to any part of the subject (for this is the
contradictory of the assumption which was made: for it was supposed
that A necessarily belongs to some C, but the syllogism per impossibile
establishes the contradictory which is opposed to this). Further,
it is clear also from an example that the conclusion will not establish
possibility. Let A be 'raven', B 'intelligent', and C 'man'. A then
belongs to no B: for no intelligent thing is a raven. But B is possible
for all C: for every man may possibly be intelligent. But A necessarily
belongs to no C: so the conclusion does not establish possibility.
But neither is it always necessary. Let A be 'moving', B 'science',
C 'man'. A then will belong to no B; but B is possible for all C.
And the conclusion will not be necessary. For it is not necessary
that no man should move; rather it is not necessary that any man should
move. Clearly then the conclusion establishes that one term does not
necessarily belong to any instance of another term. But we must take
our terms better. 

If the minor premiss is negative and indicates possibility, from the
actual premisses taken there can be no syllogism, but if the problematic
premiss is converted, a syllogism will be possible, as before. Let
A belong to all B, and let B possibly belong to no C. If the terms
are arranged thus, nothing necessarily follows: but if the proposition
BC is converted and it is assumed that B is possible for all C, a
syllogism results as before: for the terms are in the same relative
positions. Likewise if both the relations are negative, if the major
premiss states that A does not belong to B, and the minor premiss
indicates that B may possibly belong to no C. Through the premisses
actually taken nothing necessary results in any way; but if the problematic
premiss is converted, we shall have a syllogism. Suppose that A belongs
to no B, and B may possibly belong to no C. Through these comes nothing
necessary. But if B is assumed to be possible for all C (and this
is true) and if the premiss AB remains as before, we shall again have
the same syllogism. But if it be assumed that B does not belong to
any C, instead of possibly not belonging, there cannot be a syllogism
anyhow, whether the premiss AB is negative or affirmative. As common
instances of a necessary and positive relation we may take the terms
white-animal-snow: of a necessary and negative relation, white-animal-pitch.
Clearly then if the terms are universal, and one of the premisses
is assertoric, the other problematic, whenever the minor premiss is
problematic a syllogism always results, only sometimes it results
from the premisses that are taken, sometimes it requires the conversion
of one premiss. We have stated when each of these happens and the
reason why. But if one of the relations is universal, the other particular,
then whenever the major premiss is universal and problematic, whether
affirmative or negative, and the particular is affirmative and assertoric,
there will be a perfect syllogism, just as when the terms are universal.
The demonstration is the same as before. But whenever the major premiss
is universal, but assertoric, not problematic, and the minor is particular
and problematic, whether both premisses are negative or affirmative,
or one is negative, the other affirmative, in all cases there will
be an imperfect syllogism. Only some of them will be proved per impossibile,
others by the conversion of the problematic premiss, as has been shown
above. And a syllogism will be possible by means of conversion when
the major premiss is universal and assertoric, whether positive or
negative, and the minor particular, negative, and problematic, e.g.
if A belongs to all B or to no B, and B may possibly not belong to
some C. For if the premiss BC is converted in respect of possibility,
a syllogism results. But whenever the particular premiss is assertoric
and negative, there cannot be a syllogism. As instances of the positive
relation we may take the terms white-animal-snow; of the negative,
white-animal-pitch. For the demonstration must be made through the
indefinite nature of the particular premiss. But if the minor premiss
is universal, and the major particular, whether either premiss is
negative or affirmative, problematic or assertoric, nohow is a syllogism
possible. Nor is a syllogism possible when the premisses are particular
or indefinite, whether problematic or assertoric, or the one problematic,
the other assertoric. The demonstration is the same as above. As instances
of the necessary and positive relation we may take the terms animal-white-man;
of the necessary and negative relation, animal-white-garment. It is
evident then that if the major premiss is universal, a syllogism always
results, but if the minor is universal nothing at all can ever be
proved. 

Part 16

Whenever one premiss is necessary, the other problematic, there will
be a syllogism when the terms are related as before; and a perfect
syllogism when the minor premiss is necessary. If the premisses are
affirmative the conclusion will be problematic, not assertoric, whether
the premisses are universal or not: but if one is affirmative, the
other negative, when the affirmative is necessary the conclusion will
be problematic, not negative assertoric; but when the negative is
necessary the conclusion will be problematic negative, and assertoric
negative, whether the premisses are universal or not. Possibility
in the conclusion must be understood in the same manner as before.
There cannot be an inference to the necessary negative proposition:
for 'not necessarily to belong' is different from 'necessarily not
to belong'. 

If the premisses are affirmative, clearly the conclusion which follows
is not necessary. Suppose A necessarily belongs to all B, and let
B be possible for all C. We shall have an imperfect syllogism to prove
that A may belong to all C. That it is imperfect is clear from the
proof: for it will be proved in the same manner as above. Again, let
A be possible for all B, and let B necessarily belong to all C. We
shall then have a syllogism to prove that A may belong to all C, not
that A does belong to all C: and it is perfect, not imperfect: for
it is completed directly through the original premisses.

But if the premisses are not similar in quality, suppose first that
the negative premiss is necessary, and let necessarily A not be possible
for any B, but let B be possible for all C. It is necessary then that
A belongs to no C. For suppose A to belong to all C or to some C.
Now we assumed that A is not possible for any B. Since then the negative
proposition is convertible, B is not possible for any A. But A is
supposed to belong to all C or to some C. Consequently B will not
be possible for any C or for all C. But it was originally laid down
that B is possible for all C. And it is clear that the possibility
of belonging can be inferred, since the fact of not belonging is inferred.
Again, let the affirmative premiss be necessary, and let A possibly
not belong to any B, and let B necessarily belong to all C. The syllogism
will be perfect, but it will establish a problematic negative, not
an assertoric negative. For the major premiss was problematic, and
further it is not possible to prove the assertoric conclusion per
impossibile. For if it were supposed that A belongs to some C, and
it is laid down that A possibly does not belong to any B, no impossible
relation between B and C follows from these premisses. But if the
minor premiss is negative, when it is problematic a syllogism is possible
by conversion, as above; but when it is necessary no syllogism can
be formed. Nor again when both premisses are negative, and the minor
is necessary. The same terms as before serve both for the positive
relation-white-animal-snow, and for the negative relation-white-animal-pitch.

The same relation will obtain in particular syllogisms. Whenever the
negative proposition is necessary, the conclusion will be negative
assertoric: e.g. if it is not possible that A should belong to any
B, but B may belong to some of the Cs, it is necessary that A should
not belong to some of the Cs. For if A belongs to all C, but cannot
belong to any B, neither can B belong to any A. So if A belongs to
all C, to none of the Cs can B belong. But it was laid down that B
may belong to some C. But when the particular affirmative in the negative
syllogism, e.g. BC the minor premiss, or the universal proposition
in the affirmative syllogism, e.g. AB the major premiss, is necessary,
there will not be an assertoric conclusion. The demonstration is the
same as before. But if the minor premiss is universal, and problematic,
whether affirmative or negative, and the major premiss is particular
and necessary, there cannot be a syllogism. Premisses of this kind
are possible both where the relation is positive and necessary, e.g.
animal-white-man, and where it is necessary and negative, e.g. animal-white-garment.
But when the universal is necessary, the particular problematic, if
the universal is negative we may take the terms animal-white-raven
to illustrate the positive relation, or animal-white-pitch to illustrate
the negative; and if the universal is affirmative we may take the
terms animal-white-swan to illustrate the positive relation, and animal-white-snow
to illustrate the negative and necessary relation. Nor again is a
syllogism possible when the premisses are indefinite, or both particular.
Terms applicable in either case to illustrate the positive relation
are animal-white-man: to illustrate the negative, animal-white-inanimate.
For the relation of animal to some white, and of white to some inanimate,
is both necessary and positive and necessary and negative. Similarly
if the relation is problematic: so the terms may be used for all cases.

Clearly then from what has been said a syllogism results or not from
similar relations of the terms whether we are dealing with simple
existence or necessity, with this exception, that if the negative
premiss is assertoric the conclusion is problematic, but if the negative
premiss is necessary the conclusion is both problematic and negative
assertoric. [It is clear also that all the syllogisms are imperfect
and are perfected by means of the figures above mentioned.]

Part 17

In the second figure whenever both premisses are problematic, no syllogism
is possible, whether the premisses are affirmative or negative, universal
or particular. But when one premiss is assertoric, the other problematic,
if the affirmative is assertoric no syllogism is possible, but if
the universal negative is assertoric a conclusion can always be drawn.
Similarly when one premiss is necessary, the other problematic. Here
also we must understand the term 'possible' in the conclusion, in
the same sense as before. 

First we must point out that the negative problematic proposition
is not convertible, e.g. if A may belong to no B, it does not follow
that B may belong to no A. For suppose it to follow and assume that
B may belong to no A. Since then problematic affirmations are convertible
with negations, whether they are contraries or contradictories, and
since B may belong to no A, it is clear that B may belong to all A.
But this is false: for if all this can be that, it does not follow
that all that can be this: consequently the negative proposition is
not convertible. Further, these propositions are not incompatible,
'A may belong to no B', 'B necessarily does not belong to some of
the As'; e.g. it is possible that no man should be white (for it is
also possible that every man should be white), but it is not true
to say that it is possible that no white thing should be a man: for
many white things are necessarily not men, and the necessary (as we
saw) other than the possible. 

Moreover it is not possible to prove the convertibility of these propositions
by a reductio ad absurdum, i.e. by claiming assent to the following
argument: 'since it is false that B may belong to no A, it is true
that it cannot belong to no A, for the one statement is the contradictory
of the other. But if this is so, it is true that B necessarily belongs
to some of the As: consequently A necessarily belongs to some of the
Bs. But this is impossible.' The argument cannot be admitted, for
it does not follow that some A is necessarily B, if it is not possible
that no A should be B. For the latter expression is used in two senses,
one if A some is necessarily B, another if some A is necessarily not
B. For it is not true to say that that which necessarily does not
belong to some of the As may possibly not belong to any A, just as
it is not true to say that what necessarily belongs to some A may
possibly belong to all A. If any one then should claim that because
it is not possible for C to belong to all D, it necessarily does not
belong to some D, he would make a false assumption: for it does belong
to all D, but because in some cases it belongs necessarily, therefore
we say that it is not possible for it to belong to all. Hence both
the propositions 'A necessarily belongs to some B' and 'A necessarily
does not belong to some B' are opposed to the proposition 'A belongs
to all B'. Similarly also they are opposed to the proposition 'A may
belong to no B'. It is clear then that in relation to what is possible
and not possible, in the sense originally defined, we must assume,
not that A necessarily belongs to some B, but that A necessarily does
not belong to some B. But if this is assumed, no absurdity results:
consequently no syllogism. It is clear from what has been said that
the negative proposition is not convertible. 

This being proved, suppose it possible that A may belong to no B and
to all C. By means of conversion no syllogism will result: for the
major premiss, as has been said, is not convertible. Nor can a proof
be obtained by a reductio ad absurdum: for if it is assumed that B
can belong to all C, no false consequence results: for A may belong
both to all C and to no C. In general, if there is a syllogism, it
is clear that its conclusion will be problematic because neither of
the premisses is assertoric; and this must be either affirmative or
negative. But neither is possible. Suppose the conclusion is affirmative:
it will be proved by an example that the predicate cannot belong to
the subject. Suppose the conclusion is negative: it will be proved
that it is not problematic but necessary. Let A be white, B man, C
horse. It is possible then for A to belong to all of the one and to
none of the other. But it is not possible for B to belong nor not
to belong to C. That it is not possible for it to belong, is clear.
For no horse is a man. Neither is it possible for it not to belong.
For it is necessary that no horse should be a man, but the necessary
we found to be different from the possible. No syllogism then results.
A similar proof can be given if the major premiss is negative, the
minor affirmative, or if both are affirmative or negative. The demonstration
can be made by means of the same terms. And whenever one premiss is
universal, the other particular, or both are particular or indefinite,
or in whatever other way the premisses can be altered, the proof will
always proceed through the same terms. Clearly then, if both the premisses
are problematic, no syllogism results. 

Part 18

But if one premiss is assertoric, the other problematic, if the affirmative
is assertoric and the negative problematic no syllogism will be possible,
whether the premisses are universal or particular. The proof is the
same as above, and by means of the same terms. But when the affirmative
premiss is problematic, and the negative assertoric, we shall have
a syllogism. Suppose A belongs to no B, but can belong to all C. If
the negative proposition is converted, B will belong to no A. But
ex hypothesi can belong to all C: so a syllogism is made, proving
by means of the first figure that B may belong to no C. Similarly
also if the minor premiss is negative. But if both premisses are negative,
one being assertoric, the other problematic, nothing follows necessarily
from these premisses as they stand, but if the problematic premiss
is converted into its complementary affirmative a syllogism is formed
to prove that B may belong to no C, as before: for we shall again
have the first figure. But if both premisses are affirmative, no syllogism
will be possible. This arrangement of terms is possible both when
the relation is positive, e.g. health, animal, man, and when it is
negative, e.g. health, horse, man. 

The same will hold good if the syllogisms are particular. Whenever
the affirmative proposition is assertoric, whether universal or particular,
no syllogism is possible (this is proved similarly and by the same
examples as above), but when the negative proposition is assertoric,
a conclusion can be drawn by means of conversion, as before. Again
if both the relations are negative, and the assertoric proposition
is universal, although no conclusion follows from the actual premisses,
a syllogism can be obtained by converting the problematic premiss
into its complementary affirmative as before. But if the negative
proposition is assertoric, but particular, no syllogism is possible,
whether the other premiss is affirmative or negative. Nor can a conclusion
be drawn when both premisses are indefinite, whether affirmative or
negative, or particular. The proof is the same and by the same terms.

Part 19

If one of the premisses is necessary, the other problematic, then
if the negative is necessary a syllogistic conclusion can be drawn,
not merely a negative problematic but also a negative assertoric conclusion;
but if the affirmative premiss is necessary, no conclusion is possible.
Suppose that A necessarily belongs to no B, but may belong to all
C. If the negative premiss is converted B will belong to no A: but
A ex hypothesi is capable of belonging to all C: so once more a conclusion
is drawn by the first figure that B may belong to no C. But at the
same time it is clear that B will not belong to any C. For assume
that it does: then if A cannot belong to any B, and B belongs to some
of the Cs, A cannot belong to some of the Cs: but ex hypothesi it
may belong to all. A similar proof can be given if the minor premiss
is negative. Again let the affirmative proposition be necessary, and
the other problematic; i.e. suppose that A may belong to no B, but
necessarily belongs to all C. When the terms are arranged in this
way, no syllogism is possible. For (1) it sometimes turns out that
B necessarily does not belong to C. Let A be white, B man, C swan.
White then necessarily belongs to swan, but may belong to no man;
and man necessarily belongs to no swan; Clearly then we cannot draw
a problematic conclusion; for that which is necessary is admittedly
distinct from that which is possible. (2) Nor again can we draw a
necessary conclusion: for that presupposes that both premisses are
necessary, or at any rate the negative premiss. (3) Further it is
possible also, when the terms are so arranged, that B should belong
to C: for nothing prevents C falling under B, A being possible for
all B, and necessarily belonging to C; e.g. if C stands for 'awake',
B for 'animal', A for 'motion'. For motion necessarily belongs to
what is awake, and is possible for every animal: and everything that
is awake is animal. Clearly then the conclusion cannot be the negative
assertion, if the relation must be positive when the terms are related
as above. Nor can the opposite affirmations be established: consequently
no syllogism is possible. A similar proof is possible if the major
premiss is affirmative. 

But if the premisses are similar in quality, when they are negative
a syllogism can always be formed by converting the problematic premiss
into its complementary affirmative as before. Suppose A necessarily
does not belong to B, and possibly may not belong to C: if the premisses
are converted B belongs to no A, and A may possibly belong to all
C: thus we have the first figure. Similarly if the minor premiss is
negative. But if the premisses are affirmative there cannot be a syllogism.
Clearly the conclusion cannot be a negative assertoric or a negative
necessary proposition because no negative premiss has been laid down
either in the assertoric or in the necessary mode. Nor can the conclusion
be a problematic negative proposition. For if the terms are so related,
there are cases in which B necessarily will not belong to C; e.g.
suppose that A is white, B swan, C man. Nor can the opposite affirmations
be established, since we have shown a case in which B necessarily
does not belong to C. A syllogism then is not possible at all.

Similar relations will obtain in particular syllogisms. For whenever
the negative proposition is universal and necessary, a syllogism will
always be possible to prove both a problematic and a negative assertoric
proposition (the proof proceeds by conversion); but when the affirmative
proposition is universal and necessary, no syllogistic conclusion
can be drawn. This can be proved in the same way as for universal
propositions, and by the same terms. Nor is a syllogistic conclusion
possible when both premisses are affirmative: this also may be proved
as above. But when both premisses are negative, and the premiss that
definitely disconnects two terms is universal and necessary, though
nothing follows necessarily from the premisses as they are stated,
a conclusion can be drawn as above if the problematic premiss is converted
into its complementary affirmative. But if both are indefinite or
particular, no syllogism can be formed. The same proof will serve,
and the same terms. 

It is clear then from what has been said that if the universal and
negative premiss is necessary, a syllogism is always possible, proving
not merely a negative problematic, but also a negative assertoric
proposition; but if the affirmative premiss is necessary no conclusion
can be drawn. It is clear too that a syllogism is possible or not
under the same conditions whether the mode of the premisses is assertoric
or necessary. And it is clear that all the syllogisms are imperfect,
and are completed by means of the figures mentioned. 

Part 20

In the last figure a syllogism is possible whether both or only one
of the premisses is problematic. When the premisses are problematic
the conclusion will be problematic; and also when one premiss is problematic,
the other assertoric. But when the other premiss is necessary, if
it is affirmative the conclusion will be neither necessary or assertoric;
but if it is negative the syllogism will result in a negative assertoric
proposition, as above. In these also we must understand the expression
'possible' in the conclusion in the same way as before. 

First let the premisses be problematic and suppose that both A and
B may possibly belong to every C. Since then the affirmative proposition
is convertible into a particular, and B may possibly belong to every
C, it follows that C may possibly belong to some B. So, if A is possible
for every C, and C is possible for some of the Bs, then A is possible
for some of the Bs. For we have got the first figure. And A if may
possibly belong to no C, but B may possibly belong to all C, it follows
that A may possibly not belong to some B: for we shall have the first
figure again by conversion. But if both premisses should be negative
no necessary consequence will follow from them as they are stated,
but if the premisses are converted into their corresponding affirmatives
there will be a syllogism as before. For if A and B may possibly not
belong to C, if 'may possibly belong' is substituted we shall again
have the first figure by means of conversion. But if one of the premisses
is universal, the other particular, a syllogism will be possible,
or not, under the arrangement of the terms as in the case of assertoric
propositions. Suppose that A may possibly belong to all C, and B to
some C. We shall have the first figure again if the particular premiss
is converted. For if A is possible for all C, and C for some of the
Bs, then A is possible for some of the Bs. Similarly if the proposition
BC is universal. Likewise also if the proposition AC is negative,
and the proposition BC affirmative: for we shall again have the first
figure by conversion. But if both premisses should be negative-the
one universal and the other particular-although no syllogistic conclusion
will follow from the premisses as they are put, it will follow if
they are converted, as above. But when both premisses are indefinite
or particular, no syllogism can be formed: for A must belong sometimes
to all B and sometimes to no B. To illustrate the affirmative relation
take the terms animal-man-white; to illustrate the negative, take
the terms horse-man-white--white being the middle term. 

Part 21

If one premiss is pure, the other problematic, the conclusion will
be problematic, not pure; and a syllogism will be possible under the
same arrangement of the terms as before. First let the premisses be
affirmative: suppose that A belongs to all C, and B may possibly belong
to all C. If the proposition BC is converted, we shall have the first
figure, and the conclusion that A may possibly belong to some of the
Bs. For when one of the premisses in the first figure is problematic,
the conclusion also (as we saw) is problematic. Similarly if the proposition
BC is pure, AC problematic; or if AC is negative, Bc affirmative,
no matter which of the two is pure; in both cases the conclusion will
be problematic: for the first figure is obtained once more, and it
has been proved that if one premiss is problematic in that figure
the conclusion also will be problematic. But if the minor premiss
BC is negative, or if both premisses are negative, no syllogistic
conclusion can be drawn from the premisses as they stand, but if they
are converted a syllogism is obtained as before. 

If one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, then when
both are affirmative, or when the universal is negative, the particular
affirmative, we shall have the same sort of syllogisms: for all are
completed by means of the first figure. So it is clear that we shall
have not a pure but a problematic syllogistic conclusion. But if the
affirmative premiss is universal, the negative particular, the proof
will proceed by a reductio ad impossibile. Suppose that B belongs
to all C, and A may possibly not belong to some C: it follows that
may possibly not belong to some B. For if A necessarily belongs to
all B, and B (as has been assumed) belongs to all C, A will necessarily
belong to all C: for this has been proved before. But it was assumed
at the outset that A may possibly not belong to some C. 

Whenever both premisses are indefinite or particular, no syllogism
will be possible. The demonstration is the same as was given in the
case of universal premisses, and proceeds by means of the same terms.

Part 22

If one of the premisses is necessary, the other problematic, when
the premisses are affirmative a problematic affirmative conclusion
can always be drawn; when one proposition is affirmative, the other
negative, if the affirmative is necessary a problematic negative can
be inferred; but if the negative proposition is necessary both a problematic
and a pure negative conclusion are possible. But a necessary negative
conclusion will not be possible, any more than in the other figures.
Suppose first that the premisses are affirmative, i.e. that A necessarily
belongs to all C, and B may possibly belong to all C. Since then A
must belong to all C, and C may belong to some B, it follows that
A may (not does) belong to some B: for so it resulted in the first
figure. A similar proof may be given if the proposition BC is necessary,
and AC is problematic. Again suppose one proposition is affirmative,
the other negative, the affirmative being necessary: i.e. suppose
A may possibly belong to no C, but B necessarily belongs to all C.
We shall have the first figure once more: and-since the negative premiss
is problematic-it is clear that the conclusion will be problematic:
for when the premisses stand thus in the first figure, the conclusion
(as we found) is problematic. But if the negative premiss is necessary,
the conclusion will be not only that A may possibly not belong to
some B but also that it does not belong to some B. For suppose that
A necessarily does not belong to C, but B may belong to all C. If
the affirmative proposition BC is converted, we shall have the first
figure, and the negative premiss is necessary. But when the premisses
stood thus, it resulted that A might possibly not belong to some C,
and that it did not belong to some C; consequently here it follows
that A does not belong to some B. But when the minor premiss is negative,
if it is problematic we shall have a syllogism by altering the premiss
into its complementary affirmative, as before; but if it is necessary
no syllogism can be formed. For A sometimes necessarily belongs to
all B, and sometimes cannot possibly belong to any B. To illustrate
the former take the terms sleep-sleeping horse-man; to illustrate
the latter take the terms sleep-waking horse-man. 

Similar results will obtain if one of the terms is related universally
to the middle, the other in part. If both premisses are affirmative,
the conclusion will be problematic, not pure; and also when one premiss
is negative, the other affirmative, the latter being necessary. But
when the negative premiss is necessary, the conclusion also will be
a pure negative proposition; for the same kind of proof can be given
whether the terms are universal or not. For the syllogisms must be
made perfect by means of the first figure, so that a result which
follows in the first figure follows also in the third. But when the
minor premiss is negative and universal, if it is problematic a syllogism
can be formed by means of conversion; but if it is necessary a syllogism
is not possible. The proof will follow the same course as where the
premisses are universal; and the same terms may be used.

It is clear then in this figure also when and how a syllogism can
be formed, and when the conclusion is problematic, and when it is
pure. It is evident also that all syllogisms in this figure are imperfect,
and that they are made perfect by means of the first figure.

Part 23

It is clear from what has been said that the syllogisms in these figures
are made perfect by means of universal syllogisms in the first figure
and are reduced to them. That every syllogism without qualification
can be so treated, will be clear presently, when it has been proved
that every syllogism is formed through one or other of these figures.

It is necessary that every demonstration and every syllogism should
prove either that something belongs or that it does not, and this
either universally or in part, and further either ostensively or hypothetically.
One sort of hypothetical proof is the reductio ad impossibile. Let
us speak first of ostensive syllogisms: for after these have been
pointed out the truth of our contention will be clear with regard
to those which are proved per impossibile, and in general hypothetically.

If then one wants to prove syllogistically A of B, either as an attribute
of it or as not an attribute of it, one must assert something of something
else. If now A should be asserted of B, the proposition originally
in question will have been assumed. But if A should be asserted of
C, but C should not be asserted of anything, nor anything of it, nor
anything else of A, no syllogism will be possible. For nothing necessarily
follows from the assertion of some one thing concerning some other
single thing. Thus we must take another premiss as well. If then A
be asserted of something else, or something else of A, or something
different of C, nothing prevents a syllogism being formed, but it
will not be in relation to B through the premisses taken. Nor when
C belongs to something else, and that to something else and so on,
no connexion however being made with B, will a syllogism be possible
concerning A in its relation to B. For in general we stated that no
syllogism can establish the attribution of one thing to another, unless
some middle term is taken, which is somehow related to each by way
of predication. For the syllogism in general is made out of premisses,
and a syllogism referring to this out of premisses with the same reference,
and a syllogism relating this to that proceeds through premisses which
relate this to that. But it is impossible to take a premiss in reference
to B, if we neither affirm nor deny anything of it; or again to take
a premiss relating A to B, if we take nothing common, but affirm or
deny peculiar attributes of each. So we must take something midway
between the two, which will connect the predications, if we are to
have a syllogism relating this to that. If then we must take something
common in relation to both, and this is possible in three ways (either
by predicating A of C, and C of B, or C of both, or both of C), and
these are the figures of which we have spoken, it is clear that every
syllogism must be made in one or other of these figures. The argument
is the same if several middle terms should be necessary to establish
the relation to B; for the figure will be the same whether there is
one middle term or many. 

It is clear then that the ostensive syllogisms are effected by means
of the aforesaid figures; these considerations will show that reductiones
ad also are effected in the same way. For all who effect an argument
per impossibile infer syllogistically what is false, and prove the
original conclusion hypothetically when something impossible results
from the assumption of its contradictory; e.g. that the diagonal of
the square is incommensurate with the side, because odd numbers are
equal to evens if it is supposed to be commensurate. One infers syllogistically
that odd numbers come out equal to evens, and one proves hypothetically
the incommensurability of the diagonal, since a falsehood results
through contradicting this. For this we found to be reasoning per
impossibile, viz. proving something impossible by means of an hypothesis
conceded at the beginning. Consequently, since the falsehood is established
in reductions ad impossibile by an ostensive syllogism, and the original
conclusion is proved hypothetically, and we have already stated that
ostensive syllogisms are effected by means of these figures, it is
evident that syllogisms per impossibile also will be made through
these figures. Likewise all the other hypothetical syllogisms: for
in every case the syllogism leads up to the proposition that is substituted
for the original thesis; but the original thesis is reached by means
of a concession or some other hypothesis. But if this is true, every
demonstration and every syllogism must be formed by means of the three
figures mentioned above. But when this has been shown it is clear
that every syllogism is perfected by means of the first figure and
is reducible to the universal syllogisms in this figure.

Part 24

Further in every syllogism one of the premisses must be affirmative,
and universality must be present: unless one of the premisses is universal
either a syllogism will not be possible, or it will not refer to the
subject proposed, or the original position will be begged. Suppose
we have to prove that pleasure in music is good. If one should claim
as a premiss that pleasure is good without adding 'all', no syllogism
will be possible; if one should claim that some pleasure is good,
then if it is different from pleasure in music, it is not relevant
to the subject proposed; if it is this very pleasure, one is assuming
that which was proposed at the outset to be proved. This is more obvious
in geometrical proofs, e.g. that the angles at the base of an isosceles
triangle are equal. Suppose the lines A and B have been drawn to the
centre. If then one should assume that the angle AC is equal to the
angle BD, without claiming generally that angles of semicircles are
equal; and again if one should assume that the angle C is equal to
the angle D, without the additional assumption that every angle of
a segment is equal to every other angle of the same segment; and further
if one should assume that when equal angles are taken from the whole
angles, which are themselves equal, the remainders E and F are equal,
he will beg the thing to be proved, unless he also states that when
equals are taken from equals the remainders are equal. 

It is clear then that in every syllogism there must be a universal
premiss, and that a universal statement is proved only when all the
premisses are universal, while a particular statement is proved both
from two universal premisses and from one only: consequently if the
conclusion is universal, the premisses also must be universal, but
if the premisses are universal it is possible that the conclusion
may not be universal. And it is clear also that in every syllogism
either both or one of the premisses must be like the conclusion. I
mean not only in being affirmative or negative, but also in being
necessary, pure, problematic. We must consider also the other forms
of predication. 

It is clear also when a syllogism in general can be made and when
it cannot; and when a valid, when a perfect syllogism can be formed;
and that if a syllogism is formed the terms must be arranged in one
of the ways that have been mentioned. 

Part 25

It is clear too that every demonstration will proceed through three
terms and no more, unless the same conclusion is established by different
pairs of propositions; e.g. the conclusion E may be established through
the propositions A and B, and through the propositions C and D, or
through the propositions A and B, or A and C, or B and C. For nothing
prevents there being several middles for the same terms. But in that
case there is not one but several syllogisms. Or again when each of
the propositions A and B is obtained by syllogistic inference, e.g.
by means of D and E, and again B by means of F and G. Or one may be
obtained by syllogistic, the other by inductive inference. But thus
also the syllogisms are many; for the conclusions are many, e.g. A
and B and C. But if this can be called one syllogism, not many, the
same conclusion may be reached by more than three terms in this way,
but it cannot be reached as C is established by means of A and B.
Suppose that the proposition E is inferred from the premisses A, B,
C, and D. It is necessary then that of these one should be related
to another as whole to part: for it has already been proved that if
a syllogism is formed some of its terms must be related in this way.
Suppose then that A stands in this relation to B. Some conclusion
then follows from them. It must either be E or one or other of C and
D, or something other than these. 

(1) If it is E the syllogism will have A and B for its sole premisses.
But if C and D are so related that one is whole, the other part, some
conclusion will follow from them also; and it must be either E, or
one or other of the propositions A and B, or something other than
these. And if it is (i) E, or (ii) A or B, either (i) the syllogisms
will be more than one, or (ii) the same thing happens to be inferred
by means of several terms only in the sense which we saw to be possible.
But if (iii) the conclusion is other than E or A or B, the syllogisms
will be many, and unconnected with one another. But if C is not so
related to D as to make a syllogism, the propositions will have been
assumed to no purpose, unless for the sake of induction or of obscuring
the argument or something of the sort. 

(2) But if from the propositions A and B there follows not E but some
other conclusion, and if from C and D either A or B follows or something
else, then there are several syllogisms, and they do not establish
the conclusion proposed: for we assumed that the syllogism proved
E. And if no conclusion follows from C and D, it turns out that these
propositions have been assumed to no purpose, and the syllogism does
not prove the original proposition. 

So it is clear that every demonstration and every syllogism will proceed
through three terms only. 

This being evident, it is clear that a syllogistic conclusion follows
from two premisses and not from more than two. For the three terms
make two premisses, unless a new premiss is assumed, as was said at
the beginning, to perfect the syllogisms. It is clear therefore that
in whatever syllogistic argument the premisses through which the main
conclusion follows (for some of the preceding conclusions must be
premisses) are not even in number, this argument either has not been
drawn syllogistically or it has assumed more than was necessary to
establish its thesis. 

If then syllogisms are taken with respect to their main premisses,
every syllogism will consist of an even number of premisses and an
odd number of terms (for the terms exceed the premisses by one), and
the conclusions will be half the number of the premisses. But whenever
a conclusion is reached by means of prosyllogisms or by means of several
continuous middle terms, e.g. the proposition AB by means of the middle
terms C and D, the number of the terms will similarly exceed that
of the premisses by one (for the extra term must either be added outside
or inserted: but in either case it follows that the relations of predication
are one fewer than the terms related), and the premisses will be equal
in number to the relations of predication. The premisses however will
not always be even, the terms odd; but they will alternate-when the
premisses are even, the terms must be odd; when the terms are even,
the premisses must be odd: for along with one term one premiss is
added, if a term is added from any quarter. Consequently since the
premisses were (as we saw) even, and the terms odd, we must make them
alternately even and odd at each addition. But the conclusions will
not follow the same arrangement either in respect to the terms or
to the premisses. For if one term is added, conclusions will be added
less by one than the pre-existing terms: for the conclusion is drawn
not in relation to the single term last added, but in relation to
all the rest, e.g. if to ABC the term D is added, two conclusions
are thereby added, one in relation to A, the other in relation to
B. Similarly with any further additions. And similarly too if the
term is inserted in the middle: for in relation to one term only,
a syllogism will not be constructed. Consequently the conclusions
will be much more numerous than the terms or the premisses.

Part 26

Since we understand the subjects with which syllogisms are concerned,
what sort of conclusion is established in each figure, and in how
many moods this is done, it is evident to us both what sort of problem
is difficult and what sort is easy to prove. For that which is concluded
in many figures and through many moods is easier; that which is concluded
in few figures and through few moods is more difficult to attempt.
The universal affirmative is proved by means of the first figure only
and by this in only one mood; the universal negative is proved both
through the first figure and through the second, through the first
in one mood, through the second in two. The particular affirmative
is proved through the first and through the last figure, in one mood
through the first, in three moods through the last. The particular
negative is proved in all the figures, but once in the first, in two
moods in the second, in three moods in the third. It is clear then
that the universal affirmative is most difficult to establish, most
easy to overthrow. In general, universals are easier game for the
destroyer than particulars: for whether the predicate belongs to none
or not to some, they are destroyed: and the particular negative is
proved in all the figures, the universal negative in two. Similarly
with universal negatives: the original statement is destroyed, whether
the predicate belongs to all or to some: and this we found possible
in two figures. But particular statements can be refuted in one way
only-by proving that the predicate belongs either to all or to none.
But particular statements are easier to establish: for proof is possible
in more figures and through more moods. And in general we must not
forget that it is possible to refute statements by means of one another,
I mean, universal statements by means of particular, and particular
statements by means of universal: but it is not possible to establish
universal statements by means of particular, though it is possible
to establish particular statements by means of universal. At the same
time it is evident that it is easier to refute than to establish.

The manner in which every syllogism is produced, the number of the
terms and premisses through which it proceeds, the relation of the
premisses to one another, the character of the problem proved in each
figure, and the number of the figures appropriate to each problem,
all these matters are clear from what has been said. 

Part 27

We must now state how we may ourselves always have a supply of syllogisms
in reference to the problem proposed and by what road we may reach
the principles relative to the problem: for perhaps we ought not only
to investigate the construction of syllogisms, but also to have the
power of making them. 

Of all the things which exist some are such that they cannot be predicated
of anything else truly and universally, e.g. Cleon and Callias, i.e.
the individual and sensible, but other things may be predicated of
them (for each of these is both man and animal); and some things are
themselves predicated of others, but nothing prior is predicated of
them; and some are predicated of others, and yet others of them, e.g.
man of Callias and animal of man. It is clear then that some things
are naturally not stated of anything: for as a rule each sensible
thing is such that it cannot be predicated of anything, save incidentally:
for we sometimes say that that white object is Socrates, or that that
which approaches is Callias. We shall explain in another place that
there is an upward limit also to the process of predicating: for the
present we must assume this. Of these ultimate predicates it is not
possible to demonstrate another predicate, save as a matter of opinion,
but these may be predicated of other things. Neither can individuals
be predicated of other things, though other things can be predicated
of them. Whatever lies between these limits can be spoken of in both
ways: they may be stated of others, and others stated of them. And
as a rule arguments and inquiries are concerned with these things.
We must select the premisses suitable to each problem in this manner:
first we must lay down the subject and the definitions and the properties
of the thing; next we must lay down those attributes which follow
the thing, and again those which the thing follows, and those which
cannot belong to it. But those to which it cannot belong need not
be selected, because the negative statement implied above is convertible.
Of the attributes which follow we must distinguish those which fall
within the definition, those which are predicated as properties, and
those which are predicated as accidents, and of the latter those which
apparently and those which really belong. The larger the supply a
man has of these, the more quickly will he reach a conclusion; and
in proportion as he apprehends those which are truer, the more cogently
will he demonstrate. But he must select not those which follow some
particular but those which follow the thing as a whole, e.g. not what
follows a particular man but what follows every man: for the syllogism
proceeds through universal premisses. If the statement is indefinite,
it is uncertain whether the premiss is universal, but if the statement
is definite, the matter is clear. Similarly one must select those
attributes which the subject follows as wholes, for the reason given.
But that which follows one must not suppose to follow as a whole,
e.g. that every animal follows man or every science music, but only
that it follows, without qualification, and indeed we state it in
a proposition: for the other statement is useless and impossible,
e.g. that every man is every animal or justice is all good. But that
which something follows receives the mark 'every'. Whenever the subject,
for which we must obtain the attributes that follow, is contained
by something else, what follows or does not follow the highest term
universally must not be selected in dealing with the subordinate term
(for these attributes have been taken in dealing with the superior
term; for what follows animal also follows man, and what does not
belong to animal does not belong to man); but we must choose those
attributes which are peculiar to each subject. For some things are
peculiar to the species as distinct from the genus; for species being
distinct there must be attributes peculiar to each. Nor must we take
as things which the superior term follows, those things which the
inferior term follows, e.g. take as subjects of the predicate 'animal'
what are really subjects of the predicate 'man'. It is necessary indeed,
if animal follows man, that it should follow all these also. But these
belong more properly to the choice of what concerns man. One must
apprehend also normal consequents and normal antecedents-, for propositions
which obtain normally are established syllogistically from premisses
which obtain normally, some if not all of them having this character
of normality. For the conclusion of each syllogism resembles its principles.
We must not however choose attributes which are consequent upon all
the terms: for no syllogism can be made out of such premisses. The
reason why this is so will be clear in the sequel. 

Part 28

If men wish to establish something about some whole, they must look
to the subjects of that which is being established (the subjects of
which it happens to be asserted), and the attributes which follow
that of which it is to be predicated. For if any of these subjects
is the same as any of these attributes, the attribute originally in
question must belong to the subject originally in question. But if
the purpose is to establish not a universal but a particular proposition,
they must look for the terms of which the terms in question are predicable:
for if any of these are identical, the attribute in question must
belong to some of the subject in question. Whenever the one term has
to belong to none of the other, one must look to the consequents of
the subject, and to those attributes which cannot possibly be present
in the predicate in question: or conversely to the attributes which
cannot possibly be present in the subject, and to the consequents
of the predicate. If any members of these groups are identical, one
of the terms in question cannot possibly belong to any of the other.
For sometimes a syllogism in the first figure results, sometimes a
syllogism in the second. But if the object is to establish a particular
negative proposition, we must find antecedents of the subject in question
and attributes which cannot possibly belong to the predicate in question.
If any members of these two groups are identical, it follows that
one of the terms in question does not belong to some of the other.
Perhaps each of these statements will become clearer in the following
way. Suppose the consequents of A are designated by B, the antecedents
of A by C, attributes which cannot possibly belong to A by D. Suppose
again that the attributes of E are designated by F, the antecedents
of E by G, and attributes which cannot belong to E by H. If then one
of the Cs should be identical with one of the Fs, A must belong to
all E: for F belongs to all E, and A to all C, consequently A belongs
to all E. If C and G are identical, A must belong to some of the Es:
for A follows C, and E follows all G. If F and D are identical, A
will belong to none of the Es by a prosyllogism: for since the negative
proposition is convertible, and F is identical with D, A will belong
to none of the Fs, but F belongs to all E. Again, if B and H are identical,
A will belong to none of the Es: for B will belong to all A, but to
no E: for it was assumed to be identical with H, and H belonged to
none of the Es. If D and G are identical, A will not belong to some
of the Es: for it will not belong to G, because it does not belong
to D: but G falls under E: consequently A will not belong to some
of the Es. If B is identical with G, there will be a converted syllogism:
for E will belong to all A since B belongs to A and E to B (for B
was found to be identical with G): but that A should belong to all
E is not necessary, but it must belong to some E because it is possible
to convert the universal statement into a particular. 

It is clear then that in every proposition which requires proof we
must look to the aforesaid relations of the subject and predicate
in question: for all syllogisms proceed through these. But if we are
seeking consequents and antecedents we must look for those which are
primary and most universal, e.g. in reference to E we must look to
Kf rather than to F alone, and in reference to A we must look to KC
rather than to C alone. For if A belongs to KF, it belongs both to
F and to E: but if it does not follow KF, it may yet follow F. Similarly
we must consider the antecedents of A itself: for if a term follows
the primary antecedents, it will follow those also which are subordinate,
but if it does not follow the former, it may yet follow the latter.

It is clear too that the inquiry proceeds through the three terms
and the two premisses, and that all the syllogisms proceed through
the aforesaid figures. For it is proved that A belongs to all E, whenever
an identical term is found among the Cs and Fs. This will be the middle
term; A and E will be the extremes. So the first figure is formed.
And A will belong to some E, whenever C and G are apprehended to be
the same. This is the last figure: for G becomes the middle term.
And A will belong to no E, when D and F are identical. Thus we have
both the first figure and the middle figure; the first, because A
belongs to no F, since the negative statement is convertible, and
F belongs to all E: the middle figure because D belongs to no A, and
to all E. And A will not belong to some E, whenever D and G are identical.
This is the last figure: for A will belong to no G, and E will belong
to all G. Clearly then all syllogisms proceed through the aforesaid
figures, and we must not select consequents of all the terms, because
no syllogism is produced from them. For (as we saw) it is not possible
at all to establish a proposition from consequents, and it is not
possible to refute by means of a consequent of both the terms in question:
for the middle term must belong to the one, and not belong to the
other. 

It is clear too that other methods of inquiry by selection of middle
terms are useless to produce a syllogism, e.g. if the consequents
of the terms in question are identical, or if the antecedents of A
are identical with those attributes which cannot possibly belong to
E, or if those attributes are identical which cannot belong to either
term: for no syllogism is produced by means of these. For if the consequents
are identical, e.g. B and F, we have the middle figure with both premisses
affirmative: if the antecedents of A are identical with attributes
which cannot belong to E, e.g. C with H, we have the first figure
with its minor premiss negative. If attributes which cannot belong
to either term are identical, e.g. C and H, both premisses are negative,
either in the first or in the middle figure. But no syllogism is possible
in this way. 

It is evident too that we must find out which terms in this inquiry
are identical, not which are different or contrary, first because
the object of our investigation is the middle term, and the middle
term must be not diverse but identical. Secondly, wherever it happens
that a syllogism results from taking contraries or terms which cannot
belong to the same thing, all arguments can be reduced to the aforesaid
moods, e.g. if B and F are contraries or cannot belong to the same
thing. For if these are taken, a syllogism will be formed to prove
that A belongs to none of the Es, not however from the premisses taken
but in the aforesaid mood. For B will belong to all A and to no E.
Consequently B must be identical with one of the Hs. Again, if B and
G cannot belong to the same thing, it follows that A will not belong
to some of the Es: for then too we shall have the middle figure: for
B will belong to all A and to no G. Consequently B must be identical
with some of the Hs. For the fact that B and G cannot belong to the
same thing differs in no way from the fact that B is identical with
some of the Hs: for that includes everything which cannot belong to
E. 

It is clear then that from the inquiries taken by themselves no syllogism
results; but if B and F are contraries B must be identical with one
of the Hs, and the syllogism results through these terms. It turns
out then that those who inquire in this manner are looking gratuitously
for some other way than the necessary way because they have failed
to observe the identity of the Bs with the Hs. 

Part 29

Syllogisms which lead to impossible conclusions are similar to ostensive
syllogisms; they also are formed by means of the consequents and antecedents
of the terms in question. In both cases the same inquiry is involved.
For what is proved ostensively may also be concluded syllogistically
per impossibile by means of the same terms; and what is proved per
impossibile may also be proved ostensively, e.g. that A belongs to
none of the Es. For suppose A to belong to some E: then since B belongs
to all A and A to some of the Es, B will belong to some of the Es:
but it was assumed that it belongs to none. Again we may prove that
A belongs to some E: for if A belonged to none of the Es, and E belongs
to all G, A will belong to none of the Gs: but it was assumed to belong
to all. Similarly with the other propositions requiring proof. The
proof per impossibile will always and in all cases be from the consequents
and antecedents of the terms in question. Whatever the problem the
same inquiry is necessary whether one wishes to use an ostensive syllogism
or a reduction to impossibility. For both the demonstrations start
from the same terms, e.g. suppose it has been proved that A belongs
to no E, because it turns out that otherwise B belongs to some of
the Es and this is impossible-if now it is assumed that B belongs
to no E and to all A, it is clear that A will belong to no E. Again
if it has been proved by an ostensive syllogism that A belongs to
no E, assume that A belongs to some E and it will be proved per impossibile
to belong to no E. Similarly with the rest. In all cases it is necessary
to find some common term other than the subjects of inquiry, to which
the syllogism establishing the false conclusion may relate, so that
if this premiss is converted, and the other remains as it is, the
syllogism will be ostensive by means of the same terms. For the ostensive
syllogism differs from the reductio ad impossibile in this: in the
ostensive syllogism both remisses are laid down in accordance with
the truth, in the reductio ad impossibile one of the premisses is
assumed falsely. 

These points will be made clearer by the sequel, when we discuss the
reduction to impossibility: at present this much must be clear, that
we must look to terms of the kinds mentioned whether we wish to use
an ostensive syllogism or a reduction to impossibility. In the other
hypothetical syllogisms, I mean those which proceed by substitution,
or by positing a certain quality, the inquiry will be directed to
the terms of the problem to be proved-not the terms of the original
problem, but the new terms introduced; and the method of the inquiry
will be the same as before. But we must consider and determine in
how many ways hypothetical syllogisms are possible. 

Each of the problems then can be proved in the manner described; but
it is possible to establish some of them syllogistically in another
way, e.g. universal problems by the inquiry which leads up to a particular
conclusion, with the addition of an hypothesis. For if the Cs and
the Gs should be identical, but E should be assumed to belong to the
Gs only, then A would belong to every E: and again if the Ds and the
Gs should be identical, but E should be predicated of the Gs only,
it follows that A will belong to none of the Es. Clearly then we must
consider the matter in this way also. The method is the same whether
the relation is necessary or possible. For the inquiry will be the
same, and the syllogism will proceed through terms arranged in the
same order whether a possible or a pure proposition is proved. We
must find in the case of possible relations, as well as terms that
belong, terms which can belong though they actually do not: for we
have proved that the syllogism which establishes a possible relation
proceeds through these terms as well. Similarly also with the other
modes of predication. 

It is clear then from what has been said not only that all syllogisms
can be formed in this way, but also that they cannot be formed in
any other. For every syllogism has been proved to be formed through
one of the aforementioned figures, and these cannot be composed through
other terms than the consequents and antecedents of the terms in question:
for from these we obtain the premisses and find the middle term. Consequently
a syllogism cannot be formed by means of other terms. 

Part 30

The method is the same in all cases, in philosophy, in any art or
study. We must look for the attributes and the subjects of both our
terms, and we must supply ourselves with as many of these as possible,
and consider them by means of the three terms, refuting statements
in one way, confirming them in another, in the pursuit of truth starting
from premisses in which the arrangement of the terms is in accordance
with truth, while if we look for dialectical syllogisms we must start
from probable premisses. The principles of syllogisms have been stated
in general terms, both how they are characterized and how we must
hunt for them, so as not to look to everything that is said about
the terms of the problem or to the same points whether we are confirming
or refuting, or again whether we are confirming of all or of some,
and whether we are refuting of all or some. we must look to fewer
points and they must be definite. We have also stated how we must
select with reference to everything that is, e.g. about good or knowledge.
But in each science the principles which are peculiar are the most
numerous. Consequently it is the business of experience to give the
principles which belong to each subject. I mean for example that astronomical
experience supplies the principles of astronomical science: for once
the phenomena were adequately apprehended, the demonstrations of astronomy
were discovered. Similarly with any other art or science. Consequently,
if the attributes of the thing are apprehended, our business will
then be to exhibit readily the demonstrations. For if none of the
true attributes of things had been omitted in the historical survey,
we should be able to discover the proof and demonstrate everything
which admitted of proof, and to make that clear, whose nature does
not admit of proof. 

In general then we have explained fairly well how we must select premisses:
we have discussed the matter accurately in the treatise concerning
dialectic. 

Part 31

It is easy to see that division into classes is a small part of the
method we have described: for division is, so to speak, a weak syllogism;
for what it ought to prove, it begs, and it always establishes something
more general than the attribute in question. First, this very point
had escaped all those who used the method of division; and they attempted
to persuade men that it was possible to make a demonstration of substance
and essence. Consequently they did not understand what it is possible
to prove syllogistically by division, nor did they understand that
it was possible to prove syllogistically in the manner we have described.
In demonstrations, when there is a need to prove a positive statement,
the middle term through which the syllogism is formed must always
be inferior to and not comprehend the first of the extremes. But division
has a contrary intention: for it takes the universal as middle. Let
animal be the term signified by A, mortal by B, and immortal by C,
and let man, whose definition is to be got, be signified by D. The
man who divides assumes that every animal is either mortal or immortal:
i.e. whatever is A is all either B or C. Again, always dividing, he
lays it down that man is an animal, so he assumes A of D as belonging
to it. Now the true conclusion is that every D is either B or C, consequently
man must be either mortal or immortal, but it is not necessary that
man should be a mortal animal-this is begged: and this is what ought
to have been proved syllogistically. And again, taking A as mortal
animal, B as footed, C as footless, and D as man, he assumes in the
same way that A inheres either in B or in C (for every mortal animal
is either footed or footless), and he assumes A of D (for he assumed
man, as we saw, to be a mortal animal); consequently it is necessary
that man should be either a footed or a footless animal; but it is
not necessary that man should be footed: this he assumes: and it is
just this again which he ought to have demonstrated. Always dividing
then in this way it turns out that these logicians assume as middle
the universal term, and as extremes that which ought to have been
the subject of demonstration and the differentiae. In conclusion,
they do not make it clear, and show it to be necessary, that this
is man or whatever the subject of inquiry may be: for they pursue
the other method altogether, never even suspecting the presence of
the rich supply of evidence which might be used. It is clear that
it is neither possible to refute a statement by this method of division,
nor to draw a conclusion about an accident or property of a thing,
nor about its genus, nor in cases in which it is unknown whether it
is thus or thus, e.g. whether the diagonal is incommensurate. For
if he assumes that every length is either commensurate or incommensurate,
and the diagonal is a length, he has proved that the diagonal is either
incommensurate or commensurate. But if he should assume that it is
incommensurate, he will have assumed what he ought to have proved.
He cannot then prove it: for this is his method, but proof is not
possible by this method. Let A stand for 'incommensurate or commensurate',
B for 'length', C for 'diagonal'. It is clear then that this method
of investigation is not suitable for every inquiry, nor is it useful
in those cases in which it is thought to be most suitable.

From what has been said it is clear from what elements demonstrations
are formed and in what manner, and to what points we must look in
each problem. 

Part 32

Our next business is to state how we can reduce syllogisms to the
aforementioned figures: for this part of the inquiry still remains.
If we should investigate the production of the syllogisms and had
the power of discovering them, and further if we could resolve the
syllogisms produced into the aforementioned figures, our original
problem would be brought to a conclusion. It will happen at the same
time that what has been already said will be confirmed and its truth
made clearer by what we are about to say. For everything that is true
must in every respect agree with itself First then we must attempt
to select the two premisses of the syllogism (for it is easier to
divide into large parts than into small, and the composite parts are
larger than the elements out of which they are made); next we must
inquire which are universal and which particular, and if both premisses
have not been stated, we must ourselves assume the one which is missing.
For sometimes men put forward the universal premiss, but do not posit
the premiss which is contained in it, either in writing or in discussion:
or men put forward the premisses of the principal syllogism, but omit
those through which they are inferred, and invite the concession of
others to no purpose. We must inquire then whether anything unnecessary
has been assumed, or anything necessary has been omitted, and we must
posit the one and take away the other, until we have reached the two
premisses: for unless we have these, we cannot reduce arguments put
forward in the way described. In some arguments it is easy to see
what is wanting, but some escape us, and appear to be syllogisms,
because something necessary results from what has been laid down,
e.g. if the assumptions were made that substance is not annihilated
by the annihilation of what is not substance, and that if the elements
out of which a thing is made are annihilated, then that which is made
out of them is destroyed: these propositions being laid down, it is
necessary that any part of substance is substance; this has not however
been drawn by syllogism from the propositions assumed, but premisses
are wanting. Again if it is necessary that animal should exist, if
man does, and that substance should exist, if animal does, it is necessary
that substance should exist if man does: but as yet the conclusion
has not been drawn syllogistically: for the premisses are not in the
shape we required. We are deceived in such cases because something
necessary results from what is assumed, since the syllogism also is
necessary. But that which is necessary is wider than the syllogism:
for every syllogism is necessary, but not everything which is necessary
is a syllogism. Consequently, though something results when certain
propositions are assumed, we must not try to reduce it directly, but
must first state the two premisses, then divide them into their terms.
We must take that term as middle which is stated in both the remisses:
for it is necessary that the middle should be found in both premisses
in all the figures. 

If then the middle term is a predicate and a subject of predication,
or if it is a predicate, and something else is denied of it, we shall
have the first figure: if it both is a predicate and is denied of
something, the middle figure: if other things are predicated of it,
or one is denied, the other predicated, the last figure. For it was
thus that we found the middle term placed in each figure. It is placed
similarly too if the premisses are not universal: for the middle term
is determined in the same way. Clearly then, if the same term is not
stated more than once in the course of an argument, a syllogism cannot
be made: for a middle term has not been taken. Since we know what
sort of thesis is established in each figure, and in which the universal,
in what sort the particular is described, clearly we must not look
for all the figures, but for that which is appropriate to the thesis
in hand. If the thesis is established in more figures than one, we
shall recognize the figure by the position of the middle term.

Part 33

Men are frequently deceived about syllogisms because the inference
is necessary, as has been said above; sometimes they are deceived
by the similarity in the positing of the terms; and this ought not
to escape our notice. E.g. if A is stated of B, and B of C: it would
seem that a syllogism is possible since the terms stand thus: but
nothing necessary results, nor does a syllogism. Let A represent the
term 'being eternal', B 'Aristomenes as an object of thought', C 'Aristomenes'.
It is true then that A belongs to B. For Aristomenes as an object
of thought is eternal. But B also belongs to C: for Aristomenes is
Aristomenes as an object of thought. But A does not belong to C: for
Aristomenes is perishable. For no syllogism was made although the
terms stood thus: that required that the premiss Ab should be stated
universally. But this is false, that every Aristomenes who is an object
of thought is eternal, since Aristomenes is perishable. Again let
C stand for 'Miccalus', B for 'musical Miccalus', A for 'perishing
to-morrow'. It is true to predicate B of C: for Miccalus is musical
Miccalus. Also A can be predicated of B: for musical Miccalus might
perish to-morrow. But to state A of C is false at any rate. This argument
then is identical with the former; for it is not true universally
that musical Miccalus perishes to-morrow: but unless this is assumed,
no syllogism (as we have shown) is possible. 

This deception then arises through ignoring a small distinction. For
if we accept the conclusion as though it made no difference whether
we said 'This belong to that' or 'This belongs to all of that'.

Part 34

Men will frequently fall into fallacies through not setting out the
terms of the premiss well, e.g. suppose A to be health, B disease,
C man. It is true to say that A cannot belong to any B (for health
belongs to no disease) and again that B belongs to every C (for every
man is capable of disease). It would seem to follow that health cannot
belong to any man. The reason for this is that the terms are not set
out well in the statement, since if the things which are in the conditions
are substituted, no syllogism can be made, e.g. if 'healthy' is substituted
for 'health' and 'diseased' for 'disease'. For it is not true to say
that being healthy cannot belong to one who is diseased. But unless
this is assumed no conclusion results, save in respect of possibility:
but such a conclusion is not impossible: for it is possible that health
should belong to no man. Again the fallacy may occur in a similar
way in the middle figure: 'it is not possible that health should belong
to any disease, but it is possible that health should belong to every
man, consequently it is not possible that disease should belong to
any man'. In the third figure the fallacy results in reference to
possibility. For health and diseae and knowledge and ignorance, and
in general contraries, may possibly belong to the same thing, but
cannot belong to one another. This is not in agreement with what was
said before: for we stated that when several things could belong to
the same thing, they could belong to one another. 

It is evident then that in all these cases the fallacy arises from
the setting out of the terms: for if the things that are in the conditions
are substituted, no fallacy arises. It is clear then that in such
premisses what possesses the condition ought always to be substituted
for the condition and taken as the term. 

Part 35

We must not always seek to set out the terms a single word: for we
shall often have complexes of words to which a single name is not
given. Hence it is difficult to reduce syllogisms with such terms.
Sometimes too fallacies will result from such a search, e.g. the belief
that syllogism can establish that which has no mean. Let A stand for
two right angles, B for triangle, C for isosceles triangle. A then
belongs to C because of B: but A belongs to B without the mediation
of another term: for the triangle in virtue of its own nature contains
two right angles, consequently there will be no middle term for the
proposition AB, although it is demonstrable. For it is clear that
the middle must not always be assumed to be an individual thing, but
sometimes a complex of words, as happens in the case mentioned.

Part 36

That the first term belongs to the middle, and the middle to the extreme,
must not be understood in the sense that they can always be predicated
of one another or that the first term will be predicated of the middle
in the same way as the middle is predicated of the last term. The
same holds if the premisses are negative. But we must suppose the
verb 'to belong' to have as many meanings as the senses in which the
verb 'to be' is used, and in which the assertion that a thing 'is'
may be said to be true. Take for example the statement that there
is a single science of contraries. Let A stand for 'there being a
single science', and B for things which are contrary to one another.
Then A belongs to B, not in the sense that contraries are the fact
of there being a single science of them, but in the sense that it
is true to say of the contraries that there is a single science of
them. 

It happens sometimes that the first term is stated of the middle,
but the middle is not stated of the third term, e.g. if wisdom is
knowledge, and wisdom is of the good, the conclusion is that there
is knowledge of the good. The good then is not knowledge, though wisdom
is knowledge. Sometimes the middle term is stated of the third, but
the first is not stated of the middle, e.g. if there is a science
of everything that has a quality, or is a contrary, and the good both
is a contrary and has a quality, the conclusion is that there is a
science of the good, but the good is not science, nor is that which
has a quality or is a contrary, though the good is both of these.
Sometimes neither the first term is stated of the middle, nor the
middle of the third, while the first is sometimes stated of the third,
and sometimes not: e.g. if there is a genus of that of which there
is a science, and if there is a science of the good, we conclude that
there is a genus of the good. But nothing is predicated of anything.
And if that of which there is a science is a genus, and if there is
a science of the good, we conclude that the good is a genus. The first
term then is predicated of the extreme, but in the premisses one thing
is not stated of another. 

The same holds good where the relation is negative. For 'that does
not belong to this' does not always mean that 'this is not that',
but sometimes that 'this is not of that' or 'for that', e.g. 'there
is not a motion of a motion or a becoming of a becoming, but there
is a becoming of pleasure: so pleasure is not a becoming.' Or again
it may be said that there is a sign of laughter, but there is not
a sign of a sign, consequently laughter is not a sign. This holds
in the other cases too, in which the thesis is refuted because the
genus is asserted in a particular way, in relation to the terms of
the thesis. Again take the inference 'opportunity is not the right
time: for opportunity belongs to God, but the right time does not,
since nothing is useful to God'. We must take as terms opportunity-right
time-God: but the premiss must be understood according to the case
of the noun. For we state this universally without qualification,
that the terms ought always to be stated in the nominative, e.g. man,
good, contraries, not in oblique cases, e.g. of man, of a good, of
contraries, but the premisses ought to be understood with reference
to the cases of each term-either the dative, e.g. 'equal to this',
or the genitive, e.g. 'double of this', or the accusative, e.g. 'that
which strikes or sees this', or the nominative, e.g. 'man is an animal',
or in whatever other way the word falls in the premiss. 

Part 37

The expressions 'this belongs to that' and 'this holds true of that'
must be understood in as many ways as there are different categories,
and these categories must be taken either with or without qualification,
and further as simple or compound: the same holds good of the corresponding
negative expressions. We must consider these points and define them
better. 

Part 38

A term which is repeated in the premisses ought to be joined to the
first extreme, not to the middle. I mean for example that if a syllogism
should be made proving that there is knowledge of justice, that it
is good, the expression 'that it is good' (or 'qua good') should be
joined to the first term. Let A stand for 'knowledge that it is good',
B for good, C for justice. It is true to predicate A of B. For of
the good there is knowledge that it is good. Also it is true to predicate
B of C. For justice is identical with a good. In this way an analysis
of the argument can be made. But if the expression 'that it is good'
were added to B, the conclusion will not follow: for A will be true
of B, but B will not be true of C. For to predicate of justice the
term 'good that it is good' is false and not intelligible. Similarly
if it should be proved that the healthy is an object of knowledge
qua good, of goat-stag an object of knowledge qua not existing, or
man perishable qua an object of sense: in every case in which an addition
is made to the predicate, the addition must be joined to the extreme.

The position of the terms is not the same when something is established
without qualification and when it is qualified by some attribute or
condition, e.g. when the good is proved to be an object of knowledge
and when it is proved to be an object of knowledge that it is good.
If it has been proved to be an object of knowledge without qualification,
we must put as middle term 'that which is', but if we add the qualification
'that it is good', the middle term must be 'that which is something'.
Let A stand for 'knowledge that it is something', B stand for 'something',
and C stand for 'good'. It is true to predicate A of B: for ex hypothesi
there is a science of that which is something, that it is something.
B too is true of C: for that which C represents is something. Consequently
A is true of C: there will then be knowledge of the good, that it
is good: for ex hypothesi the term 'something' indicates the thing's
special nature. But if 'being' were taken as middle and 'being' simply
were joined to the extreme, not 'being something', we should not have
had a syllogism proving that there is knowledge of the good, that
it is good, but that it is; e.g. let A stand for knowledge that it
is, B for being, C for good. Clearly then in syllogisms which are
thus limited we must take the terms in the way stated. 

Part 39

We ought also to exchange terms which have the same value, word for
word, and phrase for phrase, and word and phrase, and always take
a word in preference to a phrase: for thus the setting out of the
terms will be easier. For example if it makes no difference whether
we say that the supposable is not the genus of the opinable or that
the opinable is not identical with a particular kind of supposable
(for what is meant is the same in both statements), it is better to
take as the terms the supposable and the opinable in preference to
the phrase suggested. 

Part 40

Since the expressions 'pleasure is good' and 'pleasure is the good'
are not identical, we must not set out the terms in the same way;
but if the syllogism is to prove that pleasure is the good, the term
must be 'the good', but if the object is to prove that pleasure is
good, the term will be 'good'. Similarly in all other cases.

Part 41

It is not the same, either in fact or in speech, that A belongs to
all of that to which B belongs, and that A belongs to all of that
to all of which B belongs: for nothing prevents B from belonging to
C, though not to all C: e.g. let B stand for beautiful, and C for
white. If beauty belongs to something white, it is true to say that
beauty belongs to that which is white; but not perhaps to everything
that is white. If then A belongs to B, but not to everything of which
B is predicated, then whether B belongs to all C or merely belongs
to C, it is not necessary that A should belong, I do not say to all
C, but even to C at all. But if A belongs to everything of which B
is truly stated, it will follow that A can be said of all of that
of all of which B is said. If however A is said of that of all of
which B may be said, nothing prevents B belonging to C, and yet A
not belonging to all C or to any C at all. If then we take three terms
it is clear that the expression 'A is said of all of which B is said'
means this, 'A is said of all the things of which B is said'. And
if B is said of all of a third term, so also is A: but if B is not
said of all of the third term, there is no necessity that A should
be said of all of it. 

We must not suppose that something absurd results through setting
out the terms: for we do not use the existence of this particular
thing, but imitate the geometrician who says that 'this line a foot
long' or 'this straight line' or 'this line without breadth' exists
although it does not, but does not use the diagrams in the sense that
he reasons from them. For in general, if two things are not related
as whole to part and part to whole, the prover does not prove from
them, and so no syllogism a is formed. We (I mean the learner) use
the process of setting out terms like perception by sense, not as
though it were impossible to demonstrate without these illustrative
terms, as it is to demonstrate without the premisses of the syllogism.

Part 42

We should not forget that in the same syllogism not all conclusions
are reached through one figure, but one through one figure, another
through another. Clearly then we must analyse arguments in accordance
with this. Since not every problem is proved in every figure, but
certain problems in each figure, it is clear from the conclusion in
what figure the premisses should be sought. 

Part 43

In reference to those arguments aiming at a definition which have
been directed to prove some part of the definition, we must take as
a term the point to which the argument has been directed, not the
whole definition: for so we shall be less likely to be disturbed by
the length of the term: e.g. if a man proves that water is a drinkable
liquid, we must take as terms drinkable and water. 

Part 44

Further we must not try to reduce hypothetical syllogisms; for with
the given premisses it is not possible to reduce them. For they have
not been proved by syllogism, but assented to by agreement. For instance
if a man should suppose that unless there is one faculty of contraries,
there cannot be one science, and should then argue that not every
faculty is of contraries, e.g. of what is healthy and what is sickly:
for the same thing will then be at the same time healthy and sickly.
He has shown that there is not one faculty of all contraries, but
he has not proved that there is not a science. And yet one must agree.
But the agreement does not come from a syllogism, but from an hypothesis.
This argument cannot be reduced: but the proof that there is not a
single faculty can. The latter argument perhaps was a syllogism: but
the former was an hypothesis. 

The same holds good of arguments which are brought to a conclusion
per impossibile. These cannot be analysed either; but the reduction
to what is impossible can be analysed since it is proved by syllogism,
though the rest of the argument cannot, because the conclusion is
reached from an hypothesis. But these differ from the previous arguments:
for in the former a preliminary agreement must be reached if one is
to accept the conclusion; e.g. an agreement that if there is proved
to be one faculty of contraries, then contraries fall under the same
science; whereas in the latter, even if no preliminary agreement has
been made, men still accept the reasoning, because the falsity is
patent, e.g. the falsity of what follows from the assumption that
the diagonal is commensurate, viz. that then odd numbers are equal
to evens. 

Many other arguments are brought to a conclusion by the help of an
hypothesis; these we ought to consider and mark out clearly. We shall
describe in the sequel their differences, and the various ways in
which hypothetical arguments are formed: but at present this much
must be clear, that it is not possible to resolve such arguments into
the figures. And we have explained the reason. 

Part 45

Whatever problems are proved in more than one figure, if they have
been established in one figure by syllogism, can be reduced to another
figure, e.g. a negative syllogism in the first figure can be reduced
to the second, and a syllogism in the middle figure to the first,
not all however but some only. The point will be clear in the sequel.
If A belongs to no B, and B to all C, then A belongs to no C. Thus
the first figure; but if the negative statement is converted, we shall
have the middle figure. For B belongs to no A, and to all C. Similarly
if the syllogism is not universal but particular, e.g. if A belongs
to no B, and B to some C. Convert the negative statement and you will
have the middle figure. 

The universal syllogisms in the second figure can be reduced to the
first, but only one of the two particular syllogisms. Let A belong
to no B and to all C. Convert the negative statement, and you will
have the first figure. For B will belong to no A and A to all C. But
if the affirmative statement concerns B, and the negative C, C must
be made first term. For C belongs to no A, and A to all B: therefore
C belongs to no B. B then belongs to no C: for the negative statement
is convertible. 

But if the syllogism is particular, whenever the negative statement
concerns the major extreme, reduction to the first figure will be
possible, e.g. if A belongs to no B and to some C: convert the negative
statement and you will have the first figure. For B will belong to
no A and A to some C. But when the affirmative statement concerns
the major extreme, no resolution will be possible, e.g. if A belongs
to all B, but not to all C: for the statement AB does not admit of
conversion, nor would there be a syllogism if it did. 

Again syllogisms in the third figure cannot all be resolved into the
first, though all syllogisms in the first figure can be resolved into
the third. Let A belong to all B and B to some C. Since the particular
affirmative is convertible, C will belong to some B: but A belonged
to all B: so that the third figure is formed. Similarly if the syllogism
is negative: for the particular affirmative is convertible: therefore
A will belong to no B, and to some C. 

Of the syllogisms in the last figure one only cannot be resolved into
the first, viz. when the negative statement is not universal: all
the rest can be resolved. Let A and B be affirmed of all C: then C
can be converted partially with either A or B: C then belongs to some
B. Consequently we shall get the first figure, if A belongs to all
C, and C to some of the Bs. If A belongs to all C and B to some C,
the argument is the same: for B is convertible in reference to C.
But if B belongs to all C and A to some C, the first term must be
B: for B belongs to all C, and C to some A, therefore B belongs to
some A. But since the particular statement is convertible, A will
belong to some B. If the syllogism is negative, when the terms are
universal we must take them in a similar way. Let B belong to all
C, and A to no C: then C will belong to some B, and A to no C; and
so C will be middle term. Similarly if the negative statement is universal,
the affirmative particular: for A will belong to no C, and C to some
of the Bs. But if the negative statement is particular, no resolution
will be possible, e.g. if B belongs to all C, and A not belong to
some C: convert the statement BC and both premisses will be particular.

It is clear that in order to resolve the figures into one another
the premiss which concerns the minor extreme must be converted in
both the figures: for when this premiss is altered, the transition
to the other figure is made. 

One of the syllogisms in the middle figure can, the other cannot,
be resolved into the third figure. Whenever the universal statement
is negative, resolution is possible. For if A belongs to no B and
to some C, both B and C alike are convertible in relation to A, so
that B belongs to no A and C to some A. A therefore is middle term.
But when A belongs to all B, and not to some C, resolution will not
be possible: for neither of the premisses is universal after conversion.

Syllogisms in the third figure can be resolved into the middle figure,
whenever the negative statement is universal, e.g. if A belongs to
no C, and B to some or all C. For C then will belong to no A and to
some B. But if the negative statement is particular, no resolution
will be possible: for the particular negative does not admit of conversion.

It is clear then that the same syllogisms cannot be resolved in these
figures which could not be resolved into the first figure, and that
when syllogisms are reduced to the first figure these alone are confirmed
by reduction to what is impossible. 

It is clear from what we have said how we ought to reduce syllogisms,
and that the figures may be resolved into one another. 

Part 46

In establishing or refuting, it makes some difference whether we suppose
the expressions 'not to be this' and 'to be not-this' are identical
or different in meaning, e.g. 'not to be white' and 'to be not-white'.
For they do not mean the same thing, nor is 'to be not-white' the
negation of 'to be white', but 'not to be white'. The reason for this
is as follows. The relation of 'he can walk' to 'he can not-walk'
is similar to the relation of 'it is white' to 'it is not-white';
so is that of 'he knows what is good' to 'he knows what is not-good'.
For there is no difference between the expressions 'he knows what
is good' and 'he is knowing what is good', or 'he can walk' and 'he
is able to walk': therefore there is no difference between their contraries
'he cannot walk'-'he is not able to walk'. If then 'he is not able
to walk' means the same as 'he is able not to walk', capacity to walk
and incapacity to walk will belong at the same time to the same person
(for the same man can both walk and not-walk, and is possessed of
knowledge of what is good and of what is not-good), but an affirmation
and a denial which are opposed to one another do not belong at the
same time to the same thing. As then 'not to know what is good' is
not the same as 'to know what is not good', so 'to be not-good' is
not the same as 'not to be good'. For when two pairs correspond, if
the one pair are different from one another, the other pair also must
be different. Nor is 'to be not-equal' the same as 'not to be equal':
for there is something underlying the one, viz. that which is not-equal,
and this is the unequal, but there is nothing underlying the other.
Wherefore not everything is either equal or unequal, but everything
is equal or is not equal. Further the expressions 'it is a not-white
log' and 'it is not a white log' do not imply one another's truth.
For if 'it is a not-white log', it must be a log: but that which is
not a white log need not be a log at all. Therefore it is clear that
'it is not-good' is not the denial of 'it is good'. If then every
single statement may truly be said to be either an affirmation or
a negation, if it is not a negation clearly it must in a sense be
an affirmation. But every affirmation has a corresponding negation.
The negation then of 'it is not-good' is 'it is not not-good'. The
relation of these statements to one another is as follows. Let A stand
for 'to be good', B for 'not to be good', let C stand for 'to be not-good'
and be placed under B, and let D stand for not to be not-good' and
be placed under A. Then either A or B will belong to everything, but
they will never belong to the same thing; and either C or D will belong
to everything, but they will never belong to the same thing. And B
must belong to everything to which C belongs. For if it is true to
say 'it is a not-white', it is true also to say 'it is not white':
for it is impossible that a thing should simultaneously be white and
be not-white, or be a not-white log and be a white log; consequently
if the affirmation does not belong, the denial must belong. But C
does not always belong to B: for what is not a log at all, cannot
be a not-white log either. On the other hand D belongs to everything
to which A belongs. For either C or D belongs to everything to which
A belongs. But since a thing cannot be simultaneously not-white and
white, D must belong to everything to which A belongs. For of that
which is white it is true to say that it is not not-white. But A is
not true of all D. For of that which is not a log at all it is not
true to say A, viz. that it is a white log. Consequently D is true,
but A is not true, i.e. that it is a white log. It is clear also that
A and C cannot together belong to the same thing, and that B and D
may possibly belong to the same thing. 

Privative terms are similarly related positive ter terms respect of
this arrangement. Let A stand for 'equal', B for 'not equal', C for
'unequal', D for 'not unequal'. 

In many things also, to some of which something belongs which does
not belong to others, the negation may be true in a similar way, viz.
that all are not white or that each is not white, while that each
is not-white or all are not-white is false. Similarly also 'every
animal is not-white' is not the negation of 'every animal is white'
(for both are false): the proper negation is 'every animal is not
white'. Since it is clear that 'it is not-white' and 'it is not white'
mean different things, and one is an affirmation, the other a denial,
it is evident that the method of proving each cannot be the same,
e.g. that whatever is an animal is not white or may not be white,
and that it is true to call it not-white; for this means that it is
not-white. But we may prove that it is true to call it white or not-white
in the same way for both are proved constructively by means of the
first figure. For the expression 'it is true' stands on a similar
footing to 'it is'. For the negation of 'it is true to call it white'
is not 'it is true to call it not-white' but 'it is not true to call
it white'. If then it is to be true to say that whatever is a man
is musical or is not-musical, we must assume that whatever is an animal
either is musical or is not-musical; and the proof has been made.
That whatever is a man is not musical is proved destructively in the
three ways mentioned. 

In general whenever A and B are such that they cannot belong at the
same time to the same thing, and one of the two necessarily belongs
to everything, and again C and D are related in the same way, and
A follows C but the relation cannot be reversed, then D must follow
B and the relation cannot be reversed. And A and D may belong to the
same thing, but B and C cannot. First it is clear from the following
consideration that D follows B. For since either C or D necessarily
belongs to everything; and since C cannot belong to that to which
B belongs, because it carries A along with it and A and B cannot belong
to the same thing; it is clear that D must follow B. Again since C
does not reciprocate with but A, but C or D belongs to everything,
it is possible that A and D should belong to the same thing. But B
and C cannot belong to the same thing, because A follows C; and so
something impossible results. It is clear then that B does not reciprocate
with D either, since it is possible that D and A should belong at
the same time to the same thing. 

It results sometimes even in such an arrangement of terms that one
is deceived through not apprehending the opposites rightly, one of
which must belong to everything, e.g. we may reason that 'if A and
B cannot belong at the same time to the same thing, but it is necessary
that one of them should belong to whatever the other does not belong
to: and again C and D are related in the same way, and follows everything
which C follows: it will result that B belongs necessarily to everything
to which D belongs': but this is false. 'Assume that F stands for
the negation of A and B, and again that H stands for the negation
of C and D. It is necessary then that either A or F should belong
to everything: for either the affirmation or the denial must belong.
And again either C or H must belong to everything: for they are related
as affirmation and denial. And ex hypothesi A belongs to everything
ever thing to which C belongs. Therefore H belongs to everything to
which F belongs. Again since either F or B belongs to everything,
and similarly either H or D, and since H follows F, B must follow
D: for we know this. If then A follows C, B must follow D'. But this
is false: for as we proved the sequence is reversed in terms so constituted.
The fallacy arises because perhaps it is not necessary that A or F
should belong to everything, or that F or B should belong to everything:
for F is not the denial of A. For not good is the negation of good:
and not-good is not identical with 'neither good nor not-good'. Similarly
also with C and D. For two negations have been assumed in respect
to one term. 



BOOK II

Part 1 

We have already explained the number of the figures, the character
and number of the premisses, when and how a syllogism is formed; further
what we must look for when a refuting and establishing propositions,
and how we should investigate a given problem in any branch of inquiry,
also by what means we shall obtain principles appropriate to each
subject. Since some syllogisms are universal, others particular, all
the universal syllogisms give more than one result, and of particular
syllogisms the affirmative yield more than one, the negative yield
only the stated conclusion. For all propositions are convertible save
only the particular negative: and the conclusion states one definite
thing about another definite thing. Consequently all syllogisms save
the particular negative yield more than one conclusion, e.g. if A
has been proved to to all or to some B, then B must belong to some
A: and if A has been proved to belong to no B, then B belongs to no
A. This is a different conclusion from the former. But if A does not
belong to some B, it is not necessary that B should not belong to
some A: for it may possibly belong to all A. 

This then is the reason common to all syllogisms whether universal
or particular. But it is possible to give another reason concerning
those which are universal. For all the things that are subordinate
to the middle term or to the conclusion may be proved by the same
syllogism, if the former are placed in the middle, the latter in the
conclusion; e.g. if the conclusion AB is proved through C, whatever
is subordinate to B or C must accept the predicate A: for if D is
included in B as in a whole, and B is included in A, then D will be
included in A. Again if E is included in C as in a whole, and C is
included in A, then E will be included in A. Similarly if the syllogism
is negative. In the second figure it will be possible to infer only
that which is subordinate to the conclusion, e.g. if A belongs to
no B and to all C; we conclude that B belongs to no C. If then D is
subordinate to C, clearly B does not belong to it. But that B does
not belong to what is subordinate to A is not clear by means of the
syllogism. And yet B does not belong to E, if E is subordinate to
A. But while it has been proved through the syllogism that B belongs
to no C, it has been assumed without proof that B does not belong
to A, consequently it does not result through the syllogism that B
does not belong to E. 

But in particular syllogisms there will be no necessity of inferring
what is subordinate to the conclusion (for a syllogism does not result
when this premiss is particular), but whatever is subordinate to the
middle term may be inferred, not however through the syllogism, e.g.
if A belongs to all B and B to some C. Nothing can be inferred about
that which is subordinate to C; something can be inferred about that
which is subordinate to B, but not through the preceding syllogism.
Similarly in the other figures. That which is subordinate to the conclusion
cannot be proved; the other subordinate can be proved, only not through
the syllogism, just as in the universal syllogisms what is subordinate
to the middle term is proved (as we saw) from a premiss which is not
demonstrated: consequently either a conclusion is not possible in
the case of universal syllogisms or else it is possible also in the
case of particular syllogisms. 

Part 2

It is possible for the premisses of the syllogism to be true, or to
be false, or to be the one true, the other false. The conclusion is
either true or false necessarily. From true premisses it is not possible
to draw a false conclusion, but a true conclusion may be drawn from
false premisses, true however only in respect to the fact, not to
the reason. The reason cannot be established from false premisses:
why this is so will be explained in the sequel. 

First then that it is not possible to draw a false conclusion from
true premisses, is made clear by this consideration. If it is necessary
that B should be when A is, it is necessary that A should not be when
B is not. If then A is true, B must be true: otherwise it will turn
out that the same thing both is and is not at the same time. But this
is impossible. Let it not, because A is laid down as a single term,
be supposed that it is possible, when a single fact is given, that
something should necessarily result. For that is not possible. For
what results necessarily is the conclusion, and the means by which
this comes about are at the least three terms, and two relations of
subject and predicate or premisses. If then it is true that A belongs
to all that to which B belongs, and that B belongs to all that to
which C belongs, it is necessary that A should belong to all that
to which C belongs, and this cannot be false: for then the same thing
will belong and not belong at the same time. So A is posited as one
thing, being two premisses taken together. The same holds good of
negative syllogisms: it is not possible to prove a false conclusion
from true premisses. 

But from what is false a true conclusion may be drawn, whether both
the premisses are false or only one, provided that this is not either
of the premisses indifferently, if it is taken as wholly false: but
if the premiss is not taken as wholly false, it does not matter which
of the two is false. (1) Let A belong to the whole of C, but to none
of the Bs, neither let B belong to C. This is possible, e.g. animal
belongs to no stone, nor stone to any man. If then A is taken to belong
to all B and B to all C, A will belong to all C; consequently though
both the premisses are false the conclusion is true: for every man
is an animal. Similarly with the negative. For it is possible that
neither A nor B should belong to any C, although A belongs to all
B, e.g. if the same terms are taken and man is put as middle: for
neither animal nor man belongs to any stone, but animal belongs to
every man. Consequently if one term is taken to belong to none of
that to which it does belong, and the other term is taken to belong
to all of that to which it does not belong, though both the premisses
are false the conclusion will be true. (2) A similar proof may be
given if each premiss is partially false. 

(3) But if one only of the premisses is false, when the first premiss
is wholly false, e.g. AB, the conclusion will not be true, but if
the premiss BC is wholly false, a true conclusion will be possible.
I mean by 'wholly false' the contrary of the truth, e.g. if what belongs
to none is assumed to belong to all, or if what belongs to all is
assumed to belong to none. Let A belong to no B, and B to all C. If
then the premiss BC which I take is true, and the premiss AB is wholly
false, viz. that A belongs to all B, it is impossible that the conclusion
should be true: for A belonged to none of the Cs, since A belonged
to nothing to which B belonged, and B belonged to all C. Similarly
there cannot be a true conclusion if A belongs to all B, and B to
all C, but while the true premiss BC is assumed, the wholly false
premiss AB is also assumed, viz. that A belongs to nothing to which
B belongs: here the conclusion must be false. For A will belong to
all C, since A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and B to
all C. It is clear then that when the first premiss is wholly false,
whether affirmative or negative, and the other premiss is true, the
conclusion cannot be true. 

(4) But if the premiss is not wholly false, a true conclusion is possible.
For if A belongs to all C and to some B, and if B belongs to all C,
e.g. animal to every swan and to some white thing, and white to every
swan, then if we take as premisses that A belongs to all B, and B
to all C, A will belong to all C truly: for every swan is an animal.
Similarly if the statement AB is negative. For it is possible that
A should belong to some B and to no C, and that B should belong to
all C, e.g. animal to some white thing, but to no snow, and white
to all snow. If then one should assume that A belongs to no B, and
B to all C, then will belong to no C. 

(5) But if the premiss AB, which is assumed, is wholly true, and the
premiss BC is wholly false, a true syllogism will be possible: for
nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B belongs
to no C, e.g. these being species of the same genus which are not
subordinate one to the other: for animal belongs both to horse and
to man, but horse to no man. If then it is assumed that A belongs
to all B and B to all C, the conclusion will be true, although the
premiss BC is wholly false. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative.
For it is possible that A should belong neither to any B nor to any
C, and that B should not belong to any C, e.g. a genus to species
of another genus: for animal belongs neither to music nor to the art
of healing, nor does music belong to the art of healing. If then it
is assumed that A belongs to no B, and B to all C, the conclusion
will be true. 

(6) And if the premiss BC is not wholly false but in part only, even
so the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to
the whole of B and of C, while B belongs to some C, e.g. a genus to
its species and difference: for animal belongs to every man and to
every footed thing, and man to some footed things though not to all.
If then it is assumed that A belongs to all B, and B to all C, A will
belong to all C: and this ex hypothesi is true. Similarly if the premiss
AB is negative. For it is possible that A should neither belong to
any B nor to any C, though B belongs to some C, e.g. a genus to the
species of another genus and its difference: for animal neither belongs
to any wisdom nor to any instance of 'speculative', but wisdom belongs
to some instance of 'speculative'. If then it should be assumed that
A belongs to no B, and B to all C, will belong to no C: and this ex
hypothesi is true. 

In particular syllogisms it is possible when the first premiss is
wholly false, and the other true, that the conclusion should be true;
also when the first premiss is false in part, and the other true;
and when the first is true, and the particular is false; and when
both are false. (7) For nothing prevents A belonging to no B, but
to some C, and B to some C, e.g. animal belongs to no snow, but to
some white thing, and snow to some white thing. If then snow is taken
as middle, and animal as first term, and it is assumed that A belongs
to the whole of B, and B to some C, then the premiss BC is wholly
false, the premiss BC true, and the conclusion true. Similarly if
the premiss AB is negative: for it is possible that A should belong
to the whole of B, but not to some C, although B belongs to some C,
e.g. animal belongs to every man, but does not follow some white,
but man belongs to some white; consequently if man be taken as middle
term and it is assumed that A belongs to no B but B belongs to some
C, the conclusion will be true although the premiss AB is wholly false.
(If the premiss AB is false in part, the conclusion may be true. For
nothing prevents A belonging both to B and to some C, and B belonging
to some C, e.g. animal to something beautiful and to something great,
and beautiful belonging to something great. If then A is assumed to
belong to all B, and B to some C, the a premiss AB will be partially
false, the premiss BC will be true, and the conclusion true. Similarly
if the premiss AB is negative. For the same terms will serve, and
in the same positions, to prove the point. 

(9) Again if the premiss AB is true, and the premiss BC is false,
the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to the
whole of B and to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. animal to
every swan and to some black things, though swan belongs to no black
thing. Consequently if it should be assumed that A belongs to all
B, and B to some C, the conclusion will be true, although the statement
Bc is false. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative. For it is possible
that A should belong to no B, and not to some C, while B belongs to
no C, e.g. a genus to the species of another genus and to the accident
of its own species: for animal belongs to no number and not to some
white things, and number belongs to nothing white. If then number
is taken as middle, and it is assumed that A belongs to no B, and
B to some C, then A will not belong to some C, which ex hypothesi
is true. And the premiss AB is true, the premiss BC false.

(10) Also if the premiss AB is partially false, and the premiss BC
is false too, the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging
to some B and to some C, though B belongs to no C, e.g. if B is the
contrary of C, and both are accidents of the same genus: for animal
belongs to some white things and to some black things, but white belongs
to no black thing. If then it is assumed that A belongs to all B,
and B to some C, the conclusion will be true. Similarly if the premiss
AB is negative: for the same terms arranged in the same way will serve
for the proof. 

(11) Also though both premisses are false the conclusion may be true.
For it is possible that A may belong to no B and to some C, while
B belongs to no C, e.g. a genus in relation to the species of another
genus, and to the accident of its own species: for animal belongs
to no number, but to some white things, and number to nothing white.
If then it is assumed that A belongs to all B and B to some C, the
conclusion will be true, though both premisses are false. Similarly
also if the premiss AB is negative. For nothing prevents A belonging
to the whole of B, and not to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g.
animal belongs to every swan, and not to some black things, and swan
belongs to nothing black. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs
to no B, and B to some C, then A does not belong to some C. The conclusion
then is true, but the premisses arc false. 

Part 3

In the middle figure it is possible in every way to reach a true conclusion
through false premisses, whether the syllogisms are universal or particular,
viz. when both premisses are wholly false; when each is partially
false; when one is true, the other wholly false (it does not matter
which of the two premisses is false); if both premisses are partially
false; if one is quite true, the other partially false; if one is
wholly false, the other partially true. For (1) if A belongs to no
B and to all C, e.g. animal to no stone and to every horse, then if
the premisses are stated contrariwise and it is assumed that A belongs
to all B and to no C, though the premisses are wholly false they will
yield a true conclusion. Similarly if A belongs to all B and to no
C: for we shall have the same syllogism. 

(2) Again if one premiss is wholly false, the other wholly true: for
nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B belongs
to no C, e.g. a genus to its co-ordinate species. For animal belongs
to every horse and man, and no man is a horse. If then it is assumed
that animal belongs to all of the one, and none of the other, the
one premiss will be wholly false, the other wholly true, and the conclusion
will be true whichever term the negative statement concerns.

(3) Also if one premiss is partially false, the other wholly true.
For it is possible that A should belong to some B and to all C, though
B belongs to no C, e.g. animal to some white things and to every raven,
though white belongs to no raven. If then it is assumed that A belongs
to no B, but to the whole of C, the premiss AB is partially false,
the premiss AC wholly true, and the conclusion true. Similarly if
the negative statement is transposed: the proof can be made by means
of the same terms. Also if the affirmative premiss is partially false,
the negative wholly true, a true conclusion is possible. For nothing
prevents A belonging to some B, but not to C as a whole, while B belongs
to no C, e.g. animal belongs to some white things, but to no pitch,
and white belongs to no pitch. Consequently if it is assumed that
A belongs to the whole of B, but to no C, the premiss AB is partially
false, the premiss AC is wholly true, and the conclusion is true.

(4) And if both the premisses are partially false, the conclusion
may be true. For it is possible that A should belong to some B and
to some C, and B to no C, e.g. animal to some white things and to
some black things, though white belongs to nothing black. If then
it is assumed that A belongs to all B and to no C, both premisses
are partially false, but the conclusion is true. Similarly, if the
negative premiss is transposed, the proof can be made by means of
the same terms. 

It is clear also that our thesis holds in particular syllogisms. For
(5) nothing prevents A belonging to all B and to some C, though B
does not belong to some C, e.g. animal to every man and to some white
things, though man will not belong to some white things. If then it
is stated that A belongs to no B and to some C, the universal premiss
is wholly false, the particular premiss is true, and the conclusion
is true. Similarly if the premiss AB is affirmative: for it is possible
that A should belong to no B, and not to some C, though B does not
belong to some C, e.g. animal belongs to nothing lifeless, and does
not belong to some white things, and lifeless will not belong to some
white things. If then it is stated that A belongs to all B and not
to some C, the premiss AB which is universal is wholly false, the
premiss AC is true, and the conclusion is true. Also a true conclusion
is possible when the universal premiss is true, and the particular
is false. For nothing prevents A following neither B nor C at all,
while B does not belong to some C, e.g. animal belongs to no number
nor to anything lifeless, and number does not follow some lifeless
things. If then it is stated that A belongs to no B and to some C,
the conclusion will be true, and the universal premiss true, but the
particular false. Similarly if the premiss which is stated universally
is affirmative. For it is possible that should A belong both to B
and to C as wholes, though B does not follow some C, e.g. a genus
in relation to its species and difference: for animal follows every
man and footed things as a whole, but man does not follow every footed
thing. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to the whole of
B, but does not belong to some C, the universal premiss is true, the
particular false, and the conclusion true. 

(6) It is clear too that though both premisses are false they may
yield a true conclusion, since it is possible that A should belong
both to B and to C as wholes, though B does not follow some C. For
if it is assumed that A belongs to no B and to some C, the premisses
are both false, but the conclusion is true. Similarly if the universal
premiss is affirmative and the particular negative. For it is possible
that A should follow no B and all C, though B does not belong to some
C, e.g. animal follows no science but every man, though science does
not follow every man. If then A is assumed to belong to the whole
of B, and not to follow some C, the premisses are false but the conclusion
is true. 

Part 4

In the last figure a true conclusion may come through what is false,
alike when both premisses are wholly false, when each is partly false,
when one premiss is wholly true, the other false, when one premiss
is partly false, the other wholly true, and vice versa, and in every
other way in which it is possible to alter the premisses. For (1)
nothing prevents neither A nor B from belonging to any C, while A
belongs to some B, e.g. neither man nor footed follows anything lifeless,
though man belongs to some footed things. If then it is assumed that
A and B belong to all C, the premisses will be wholly false, but the
conclusion true. Similarly if one premiss is negative, the other affirmative.
For it is possible that B should belong to no C, but A to all C, and
that should not belong to some B, e.g. black belongs to no swan, animal
to every swan, and animal not to everything black. Consequently if
it is assumed that B belongs to all C, and A to no C, A will not belong
to some B: and the conclusion is true, though the premisses are false.

(2) Also if each premiss is partly false, the conclusion may be true.
For nothing prevents both A and B from belonging to some C while A
belongs to some B, e.g. white and beautiful belong to some animals,
and white to some beautiful things. If then it is stated that A and
B belong to all C, the premisses are partially false, but the conclusion
is true. Similarly if the premiss AC is stated as negative. For nothing
prevents A from not belonging, and B from belonging, to some C, while
A does not belong to all B, e.g. white does not belong to some animals,
beautiful belongs to some animals, and white does not belong to everything
beautiful. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to no C, and
B to all C, both premisses are partly false, but the conclusion is
true. 

(3) Similarly if one of the premisses assumed is wholly false, the
other wholly true. For it is possible that both A and B should follow
all C, though A does not belong to some B, e.g. animal and white follow
every swan, though animal does not belong to everything white. Taking
these then as terms, if one assumes that B belongs to the whole of
C, but A does not belong to C at all, the premiss BC will be wholly
true, the premiss AC wholly false, and the conclusion true. Similarly
if the statement BC is false, the statement AC true, the conclusion
may be true. The same terms will serve for the proof. Also if both
the premisses assumed are affirmative, the conclusion may be true.
For nothing prevents B from following all C, and A from not belonging
to C at all, though A belongs to some B, e.g. animal belongs to every
swan, black to no swan, and black to some animals. Consequently if
it is assumed that A and B belong to every C, the premiss BC is wholly
true, the premiss AC is wholly false, and the conclusion is true.
Similarly if the premiss AC which is assumed is true: the proof can
be made through the same terms. 

(4) Again if one premiss is wholly true, the other partly false, the
conclusion may be true. For it is possible that B should belong to
all C, and A to some C, while A belongs to some B, e.g. biped belongs
to every man, beautiful not to every man, and beautiful to some bipeds.
If then it is assumed that both A and B belong to the whole of C,
the premiss BC is wholly true, the premiss AC partly false, the conclusion
true. Similarly if of the premisses assumed AC is true and BC partly
false, a true conclusion is possible: this can be proved, if the same
terms as before are transposed. Also the conclusion may be true if
one premiss is negative, the other affirmative. For since it is possible
that B should belong to the whole of C, and A to some C, and, when
they are so, that A should not belong to all B, therefore it is assumed
that B belongs to the whole of C, and A to no C, the negative premiss
is partly false, the other premiss wholly true, and the conclusion
is true. Again since it has been proved that if A belongs to no C
and B to some C, it is possible that A should not belong to some C,
it is clear that if the premiss AC is wholly true, and the premiss
BC partly false, it is possible that the conclusion should be true.
For if it is assumed that A belongs to no C, and B to all C, the premiss
AC is wholly true, and the premiss BC is partly false. 

(5) It is clear also in the case of particular syllogisms that a true
conclusion may come through what is false, in every possible way.
For the same terms must be taken as have been taken when the premisses
are universal, positive terms in positive syllogisms, negative terms
in negative. For it makes no difference to the setting out of the
terms, whether one assumes that what belongs to none belongs to all
or that what belongs to some belongs to all. The same applies to negative
statements. 

It is clear then that if the conclusion is false, the premisses of
the argument must be false, either all or some of them; but when the
conclusion is true, it is not necessary that the premisses should
be true, either one or all, yet it is possible, though no part of
the syllogism is true, that the conclusion may none the less be true;
but it is not necessitated. The reason is that when two things are
so related to one another, that if the one is, the other necessarily
is, then if the latter is not, the former will not be either, but
if the latter is, it is not necessary that the former should be. But
it is impossible that the same thing should be necessitated by the
being and by the not-being of the same thing. I mean, for example,
that it is impossible that B should necessarily be great since A is
white and that B should necessarily be great since A is not white.
For whenever since this, A, is white it is necessary that that, B,
should be great, and since B is great that C should not be white,
then it is necessary if is white that C should not be white. And whenever
it is necessary, since one of two things is, that the other should
be, it is necessary, if the latter is not, that the former (viz. A)
should not be. If then B is not great A cannot be white. But if, when
A is not white, it is necessary that B should be great, it necessarily
results that if B is not great, B itself is great. (But this is impossible.)
For if B is not great, A will necessarily not be white. If then when
this is not white B must be great, it results that if B is not great,
it is great, just as if it were proved through three terms.

Part 5

Circular and reciprocal proof means proof by means of the conclusion,
i.e. by converting one of the premisses simply and inferring the premiss
which was assumed in the original syllogism: e.g. suppose it has been
necessary to prove that A belongs to all C, and it has been proved
through B; suppose that A should now be proved to belong to B by assuming
that A belongs to C, and C to B-so A belongs to B: but in the first
syllogism the converse was assumed, viz. that B belongs to C. Or suppose
it is necessary to prove that B belongs to C, and A is assumed to
belong to C, which was the conclusion of the first syllogism, and
B to belong to A but the converse was assumed in the earlier syllogism,
viz. that A belongs to B. In no other way is reciprocal proof possible.
If another term is taken as middle, the proof is not circular: for
neither of the propositions assumed is the same as before: if one
of the accepted terms is taken as middle, only one of the premisses
of the first syllogism can be assumed in the second: for if both of
them are taken the same conclusion as before will result: but it must
be different. If the terms are not convertible, one of the premisses
from which the syllogism results must be undemonstrated: for it is
not possible to demonstrate through these terms that the third belongs
to the middle or the middle to the first. If the terms are convertible,
it is possible to demonstrate everything reciprocally, e.g. if A and
B and C are convertible with one another. Suppose the proposition
AC has been demonstrated through B as middle term, and again the proposition
AB through the conclusion and the premiss BC converted, and similarly
the proposition BC through the conclusion and the premiss AB converted.
But it is necessary to prove both the premiss CB, and the premiss
BA: for we have used these alone without demonstrating them. If then
it is assumed that B belongs to all C, and C to all A, we shall have
a syllogism relating B to A. Again if it is assumed that C belongs
to all A, and A to all B, C must belong to all B. In both these syllogisms
the premiss CA has been assumed without being demonstrated: the other
premisses had ex hypothesi been proved. Consequently if we succeed
in demonstrating this premiss, all the premisses will have been proved
reciprocally. If then it is assumed that C belongs to all B, and B
to all A, both the premisses assumed have been proved, and C must
belong to A. It is clear then that only if the terms are convertible
is circular and reciprocal demonstration possible (if the terms are
not convertible, the matter stands as we said above). But it turns
out in these also that we use for the demonstration the very thing
that is being proved: for C is proved of B, and B of by assuming that
C is said of and C is proved of A through these premisses, so that
we use the conclusion for the demonstration. 

In negative syllogisms reciprocal proof is as follows. Let B belong
to all C, and A to none of the Bs: we conclude that A belongs to none
of the Cs. If again it is necessary to prove that A belongs to none
of the Bs (which was previously assumed) A must belong to no C, and
C to all B: thus the previous premiss is reversed. If it is necessary
to prove that B belongs to C, the proposition AB must no longer be
converted as before: for the premiss 'B belongs to no A' is identical
with the premiss 'A belongs to no B'. But we must assume that B belongs
to all of that to none of which longs. Let A belong to none of the
Cs (which was the previous conclusion) and assume that B belongs to
all of that to none of which A belongs. It is necessary then that
B should belong to all C. Consequently each of the three propositions
has been made a conclusion, and this is circular demonstration, to
assume the conclusion and the converse of one of the premisses, and
deduce the remaining premiss. 

In particular syllogisms it is not possible to demonstrate the universal
premiss through the other propositions, but the particular premiss
can be demonstrated. Clearly it is impossible to demonstrate the universal
premiss: for what is universal is proved through propositions which
are universal, but the conclusion is not universal, and the proof
must start from the conclusion and the other premiss. Further a syllogism
cannot be made at all if the other premiss is converted: for the result
is that both premisses are particular. But the particular premiss
may be proved. Suppose that A has been proved of some C through B.
If then it is assumed that B belongs to all A and the conclusion is
retained, B will belong to some C: for we obtain the first figure
and A is middle. But if the syllogism is negative, it is not possible
to prove the universal premiss, for the reason given above. But it
is possible to prove the particular premiss, if the proposition AB
is converted as in the universal syllogism, i.e 'B belongs to some
of that to some of which A does not belong': otherwise no syllogism
results because the particular premiss is negative. 

Part 6

In the second figure it is not possible to prove an affirmative proposition
in this way, but a negative proposition may be proved. An affirmative
proposition is not proved because both premisses of the new syllogism
are not affirmative (for the conclusion is negative) but an affirmative
proposition is (as we saw) proved from premisses which are both affirmative.
The negative is proved as follows. Let A belong to all B, and to no
C: we conclude that B belongs to no C. If then it is assumed that
B belongs to all A, it is necessary that A should belong to no C:
for we get the second figure, with B as middle. But if the premiss
AB was negative, and the other affirmative, we shall have the first
figure. For C belongs to all A and B to no C, consequently B belongs
to no A: neither then does A belong to B. Through the conclusion,
therefore, and one premiss, we get no syllogism, but if another premiss
is assumed in addition, a syllogism will be possible. But if the syllogism
not universal, the universal premiss cannot be proved, for the same
reason as we gave above, but the particular premiss can be proved
whenever the universal statement is affirmative. Let A belong to all
B, and not to all C: the conclusion is BC. If then it is assumed that
B belongs to all A, but not to all C, A will not belong to some C,
B being middle. But if the universal premiss is negative, the premiss
AC will not be demonstrated by the conversion of AB: for it turns
out that either both or one of the premisses is negative; consequently
a syllogism will not be possible. But the proof will proceed as in
the universal syllogisms, if it is assumed that A belongs to some
of that to some of which B does not belong. 

Part 7

In the third figure, when both premisses are taken universally, it
is not possible to prove them reciprocally: for that which is universal
is proved through statements which are universal, but the conclusion
in this figure is always particular, so that it is clear that it is
not possible at all to prove through this figure the universal premiss.
But if one premiss is universal, the other particular, proof of the
latter will sometimes be possible, sometimes not. When both the premisses
assumed are affirmative, and the universal concerns the minor extreme,
proof will be possible, but when it concerns the other extreme, impossible.
Let A belong to all C and B to some C: the conclusion is the statement
AB. If then it is assumed that C belongs to all A, it has been proved
that C belongs to some B, but that B belongs to some C has not been
proved. And yet it is necessary, if C belongs to some B, that B should
belong to some C. But it is not the same that this should belong to
that, and that to this: but we must assume besides that if this belongs
to some of that, that belongs to some of this. But if this is assumed
the syllogism no longer results from the conclusion and the other
premiss. But if B belongs to all C, and A to some C, it will be possible
to prove the proposition AC, when it is assumed that C belongs to
all B, and A to some B. For if C belongs to all B and A to some B,
it is necessary that A should belong to some C, B being middle. And
whenever one premiss is affirmative the other negative, and the affirmative
is universal, the other premiss can be proved. Let B belong to all
C, and A not to some C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to
some B. If then it is assumed further that C belongs to all B, it
is necessary that A should not belong to some C, B being middle. But
when the negative premiss is universal, the other premiss is not except
as before, viz. if it is assumed that that belongs to some of that,
to some of which this does not belong, e.g. if A belongs to no C,
and B to some C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to some
B. If then it is assumed that C belongs to some of that to some of
which does not belong, it is necessary that C should belong to some
of the Bs. In no other way is it possible by converting the universal
premiss to prove the other: for in no other way can a syllogism be
formed. 

It is clear then that in the first figure reciprocal proof is made
both through the third and through the first figure-if the conclusion
is affirmative through the first; if the conclusion is negative through
the last. For it is assumed that that belongs to all of that to none
of which this belongs. In the middle figure, when the syllogism is
universal, proof is possible through the second figure and through
the first, but when particular through the second and the last. In
the third figure all proofs are made through itself. It is clear also
that in the third figure and in the middle figure those syllogisms
which are not made through those figures themselves either are not
of the nature of circular proof or are imperfect. 

Part 8

To convert a syllogism means to alter the conclusion and make another
syllogism to prove that either the extreme cannot belong to the middle
or the middle to the last term. For it is necessary, if the conclusion
has been changed into its opposite and one of the premisses stands,
that the other premiss should be destroyed. For if it should stand,
the conclusion also must stand. It makes a difference whether the
conclusion is converted into its contradictory or into its contrary.
For the same syllogism does not result whichever form the conversion
takes. This will be made clear by the sequel. By contradictory opposition
I mean the opposition of 'to all' to 'not to all', and of 'to some'
to 'to none'; by contrary opposition I mean the opposition of 'to
all' to 'to none', and of 'to some' to 'not to some'. Suppose that
A been proved of C, through B as middle term. If then it should be
assumed that A belongs to no C, but to all B, B will belong to no
C. And if A belongs to no C, and B to all C, A will belong, not to
no B at all, but not to all B. For (as we saw) the universal is not
proved through the last figure. In a word it is not possible to refute
universally by conversion the premiss which concerns the major extreme:
for the refutation always proceeds through the third since it is necessary
to take both premisses in reference to the minor extreme. Similarly
if the syllogism is negative. Suppose it has been proved that A belongs
to no C through B. Then if it is assumed that A belongs to all C,
and to no B, B will belong to none of the Cs. And if A and B belong
to all C, A will belong to some B: but in the original premiss it
belonged to no B. 

If the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, the syllogisms
will be contradictory and not universal. For one premiss is particular,
so that the conclusion also will be particular. Let the syllogism
be affirmative, and let it be converted as stated. Then if A belongs
not to all C, but to all B, B will belong not to all C. And if A belongs
not to all C, but B belongs to all C, A will belong not to all B.
Similarly if the syllogism is negative. For if A belongs to some C,
and to no B, B will belong, not to no C at all, but-not to some C.
And if A belongs to some C, and B to all C, as was originally assumed,
A will belong to some B. 

In particular syllogisms when the conclusion is converted into its
contradictory, both premisses may be refuted, but when it is converted
into its contrary, neither. For the result is no longer, as in the
universal syllogisms, refutation in which the conclusion reached by
O, conversion lacks universality, but no refutation at all. Suppose
that A has been proved of some C. If then it is assumed that A belongs
to no C, and B to some C, A will not belong to some B: and if A belongs
to no C, but to all B, B will belong to no C. Thus both premisses
are refuted. But neither can be refuted if the conclusion is converted
into its contrary. For if A does not belong to some C, but to all
B, then B will not belong to some C. But the original premiss is not
yet refuted: for it is possible that B should belong to some C, and
should not belong to some C. The universal premiss AB cannot be affected
by a syllogism at all: for if A does not belong to some of the Cs,
but B belongs to some of the Cs, neither of the premisses is universal.
Similarly if the syllogism is negative: for if it should be assumed
that A belongs to all C, both premisses are refuted: but if the assumption
is that A belongs to some C, neither premiss is refuted. The proof
is the same as before. 

Part 9

In the second figure it is not possible to refute the premiss which
concerns the major extreme by establishing something contrary to it,
whichever form the conversion of the conclusion may take. For the
conclusion of the refutation will always be in the third figure, and
in this figure (as we saw) there is no universal syllogism. The other
premiss can be refuted in a manner similar to the conversion: I mean,
if the conclusion of the first syllogism is converted into its contrary,
the conclusion of the refutation will be the contrary of the minor
premiss of the first, if into its contradictory, the contradictory.
Let A belong to all B and to no C: conclusion BC. If then it is assumed
that B belongs to all C, and the proposition AB stands, A will belong
to all C, since the first figure is produced. If B belongs to all
C, and A to no C, then A belongs not to all B: the figure is the last.
But if the conclusion BC is converted into its contradictory, the
premiss AB will be refuted as before, the premiss, AC by its contradictory.
For if B belongs to some C, and A to no C, then A will not belong
to some B. Again if B belongs to some C, and A to all B, A will belong
to some C, so that the syllogism results in the contradictory of the
minor premiss. A similar proof can be given if the premisses are transposed
in respect of their quality. 

If the syllogism is particular, when the conclusion is converted into
its contrary neither premiss can be refuted, as also happened in the
first figure,' if the conclusion is converted into its contradictory,
both premisses can be refuted. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and
to some C: the conclusion is BC. If then it is assumed that B belongs
to some C, and the statement AB stands, the conclusion will be that
A does not belong to some C. But the original statement has not been
refuted: for it is possible that A should belong to some C and also
not to some C. Again if B belongs to some C and A to some C, no syllogism
will be possible: for neither of the premisses taken is universal.
Consequently the proposition AB is not refuted. But if the conclusion
is converted into its contradictory, both premisses can be refuted.
For if B belongs to all C, and A to no B, A will belong to no C: but
it was assumed to belong to some C. Again if B belongs to all C and
A to some C, A will belong to some B. The same proof can be given
if the universal statement is affirmative. 

Part 10

In the third figure when the conclusion is converted into its contrary,
neither of the premisses can be refuted in any of the syllogisms,
but when the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both
premisses may be refuted and in all the moods. Suppose it has been
proved that A belongs to some B, C being taken as middle, and the
premisses being universal. If then it is assumed that A does not belong
to some B, but B belongs to all C, no syllogism is formed about A
and C. Nor if A does not belong to some B, but belongs to all C, will
a syllogism be possible about B and C. A similar proof can be given
if the premisses are not universal. For either both premisses arrived
at by the conversion must be particular, or the universal premiss
must refer to the minor extreme. But we found that no syllogism is
possible thus either in the first or in the middle figure. But if
the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both the premisses
can be refuted. For if A belongs to no B, and B to all C, then A belongs
to no C: again if A belongs to no B, and to all C, B belongs to no
C. And similarly if one of the premisses is not universal. For if
A belongs to no B, and B to some C, A will not belong to some C: if
A belongs to no B, and to C, B will belong to no C. 

Similarly if the original syllogism is negative. Suppose it has been
proved that A does not belong to some B, BC being affirmative, AC
being negative: for it was thus that, as we saw, a syllogism could
be made. Whenever then the contrary of the conclusion is assumed a
syllogism will not be possible. For if A belongs to some B, and B
to all C, no syllogism is possible (as we saw) about A and C. Nor,
if A belongs to some B, and to no C, was a syllogism possible concerning
B and C. Therefore the premisses are not refuted. But when the contradictory
of the conclusion is assumed, they are refuted. For if A belongs to
all B, and B to C, A belongs to all C: but A was supposed originally
to belong to no C. Again if A belongs to all B, and to no C, then
B belongs to no C: but it was supposed to belong to all C. A similar
proof is possible if the premisses are not universal. For AC becomes
universal and negative, the other premiss particular and affirmative.
If then A belongs to all B, and B to some C, it results that A belongs
to some C: but it was supposed to belong to no C. Again if A belongs
to all B, and to no C, then B belongs to no C: but it was assumed
to belong to some C. If A belongs to some B and B to some C, no syllogism
results: nor yet if A belongs to some B, and to no C. Thus in one
way the premisses are refuted, in the other way they are not.

From what has been said it is clear how a syllogism results in each
figure when the conclusion is converted; when a result contrary to
the premiss, and when a result contradictory to the premiss, is obtained.
It is clear that in the first figure the syllogisms are formed through
the middle and the last figures, and the premiss which concerns the
minor extreme is alway refuted through the middle figure, the premiss
which concerns the major through the last figure. In the second figure
syllogisms proceed through the first and the last figures, and the
premiss which concerns the minor extreme is always refuted through
the first figure, the premiss which concerns the major extreme through
the last. In the third figure the refutation proceeds through the
first and the middle figures; the premiss which concerns the major
is always refuted through the first figure, the premiss which concerns
the minor through the middle figure. 

Part 11

It is clear then what conversion is, how it is effected in each figure,
and what syllogism results. The syllogism per impossibile is proved
when the contradictory of the conclusion stated and another premiss
is assumed; it can be made in all the figures. For it resembles conversion,
differing only in this: conversion takes place after a syllogism has
been formed and both the premisses have been taken, but a reduction
to the impossible takes place not because the contradictory has been
agreed to already, but because it is clear that it is true. The terms
are alike in both, and the premisses of both are taken in the same
way. For example if A belongs to all B, C being middle, then if it
is supposed that A does not belong to all B or belongs to no B, but
to all C (which was admitted to be true), it follows that C belongs
to no B or not to all B. But this is impossible: consequently the
supposition is false: its contradictory then is true. Similarly in
the other figures: for whatever moods admit of conversion admit also
of the reduction per impossibile. 

All the problems can be proved per impossibile in all the figures,
excepting the universal affirmative, which is proved in the middle
and third figures, but not in the first. Suppose that A belongs not
to all B, or to no B, and take besides another premiss concerning
either of the terms, viz. that C belongs to all A, or that B belongs
to all D; thus we get the first figure. If then it is supposed that
A does not belong to all B, no syllogism results whichever term the
assumed premiss concerns; but if it is supposed that A belongs to
no B, when the premiss BD is assumed as well we shall prove syllogistically
what is false, but not the problem proposed. For if A belongs to no
B, and B belongs to all D, A belongs to no D. Let this be impossible:
it is false then A belongs to no B. But the universal affirmative
is not necessarily true if the universal negative is false. But if
the premiss CA is assumed as well, no syllogism results, nor does
it do so when it is supposed that A does not belong to all B. Consequently
it is clear that the universal affirmative cannot be proved in the
first figure per impossibile. 

But the particular affirmative and the universal and particular negatives
can all be proved. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and let it have
been assumed that B belongs to all or to some C. Then it is necessary
that A should belong to no C or not to all C. But this is impossible
(for let it be true and clear that A belongs to all C): consequently
if this is false, it is necessary that A should belong to some B.
But if the other premiss assumed relates to A, no syllogism will be
possible. Nor can a conclusion be drawn when the contrary of the conclusion
is supposed, e.g. that A does not belong to some B. Clearly then we
must suppose the contradictory. 

Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let it have been assumed
that C belongs to all A. It is necessary then that C should belong
to some B. But let this be impossible, so that the supposition is
false: in that case it is true that A belongs to no B. We may proceed
in the same way if the proposition CA has been taken as negative.
But if the premiss assumed concerns B, no syllogism will be possible.
If the contrary is supposed, we shall have a syllogism and an impossible
conclusion, but the problem in hand is not proved. Suppose that A
belongs to all B, and let it have been assumed that C belongs to all
A. It is necessary then that C should belong to all B. But this is
impossible, so that it is false that A belongs to all B. But we have
not yet shown it to be necessary that A belongs to no B, if it does
not belong to all B. Similarly if the other premiss taken concerns
B; we shall have a syllogism and a conclusion which is impossible,
but the hypothesis is not refuted. Therefore it is the contradictory
that we must suppose. 

To prove that A does not belong to all B, we must suppose that it
belongs to all B: for if A belongs to all B, and C to all A, then
C belongs to all B; so that if this is impossible, the hypothesis
is false. Similarly if the other premiss assumed concerns B. The same
results if the original proposition CA was negative: for thus also
we get a syllogism. But if the negative proposition concerns B, nothing
is proved. If the hypothesis is that A belongs not to all but to some
B, it is not proved that A belongs not to all B, but that it belongs
to no B. For if A belongs to some B, and C to all A, then C will belong
to some B. If then this is impossible, it is false that A belongs
to some B; consequently it is true that A belongs to no B. But if
this is proved, the truth is refuted as well; for the original conclusion
was that A belongs to some B, and does not belong to some B. Further
the impossible does not result from the hypothesis: for then the hypothesis
would be false, since it is impossible to draw a false conclusion
from true premisses: but in fact it is true: for A belongs to some
B. Consequently we must not suppose that A belongs to some B, but
that it belongs to all B. Similarly if we should be proving that A
does not belong to some B: for if 'not to belong to some' and 'to
belong not to all' have the same meaning, the demonstration of both
will be identical. 

It is clear then that not the contrary but the contradictory ought
to be supposed in all the syllogisms. For thus we shall have necessity
of inference, and the claim we make is one that will be generally
accepted. For if of everything one or other of two contradictory statements
holds good, then if it is proved that the negation does not hold,
the affirmation must be true. Again if it is not admitted that the
affirmation is true, the claim that the negation is true will be generally
accepted. But in neither way does it suit to maintain the contrary:
for it is not necessary that if the universal negative is false, the
universal affirmative should be true, nor is it generally accepted
that if the one is false the other is true. 

Part 12

It is clear then that in the first figure all problems except the
universal affirmative are proved per impossibile. But in the middle
and the last figures this also is proved. Suppose that A does not
belong to all B, and let it have been assumed that A belongs to all
C. If then A belongs not to all B, but to all C, C will not belong
to all B. But this is impossible (for suppose it to be clear that
C belongs to all B): consequently the hypothesis is false. It is true
then that A belongs to all B. But if the contrary is supposed, we
shall have a syllogism and a result which is impossible: but the problem
in hand is not proved. For if A belongs to no B, and to all C, C will
belong to no B. This is impossible; so that it is false that A belongs
to no B. But though this is false, it does not follow that it is true
that A belongs to all B. 

When A belongs to some B, suppose that A belongs to no B, and let
A belong to all C. It is necessary then that C should belong to no
B. Consequently, if this is impossible, A must belong to some B. But
if it is supposed that A does not belong to some B, we shall have
the same results as in the first figure. 

Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let A belong to no C.
It is necessary then that C should not belong to some B. But originally
it belonged to all B, consequently the hypothesis is false: A then
will belong to no B. 

When A does not belong to an B, suppose it does belong to all B, and
to no C. It is necessary then that C should belong to no B. But this
is impossible: so that it is true that A does not belong to all B.
It is clear then that all the syllogisms can be formed in the middle
figure. 

Part 13

Similarly they can all be formed in the last figure. Suppose that
A does not belong to some B, but C belongs to all B: then A does not
belong to some C. If then this is impossible, it is false that A does
not belong to some B; so that it is true that A belongs to all B.
But if it is supposed that A belongs to no B, we shall have a syllogism
and a conclusion which is impossible: but the problem in hand is not
proved: for if the contrary is supposed, we shall have the same results
as before. 

But to prove that A belongs to some B, this hypothesis must be made.
If A belongs to no B, and C to some B, A will belong not to all C.
If then this is false, it is true that A belongs to some B.

When A belongs to no B, suppose A belongs to some B, and let it have
been assumed that C belongs to all B. Then it is necessary that A
should belong to some C. But ex hypothesi it belongs to no C, so that
it is false that A belongs to some B. But if it is supposed that A
belongs to all B, the problem is not proved. 

But this hypothesis must be made if we are prove that A belongs not
to all B. For if A belongs to all B and C to some B, then A belongs
to some C. But this we assumed not to be so, so it is false that A
belongs to all B. But in that case it is true that A belongs not to
all B. If however it is assumed that A belongs to some B, we shall
have the same result as before. 

It is clear then that in all the syllogisms which proceed per impossibile
the contradictory must be assumed. And it is plain that in the middle
figure an affirmative conclusion, and in the last figure a universal
conclusion, are proved in a way. 

Part 14

Demonstration per impossibile differs from ostensive proof in that
it posits what it wishes to refute by reduction to a statement admitted
to be false; whereas ostensive proof starts from admitted positions.
Both, indeed, take two premisses that are admitted, but the latter
takes the premisses from which the syllogism starts, the former takes
one of these, along with the contradictory of the original conclusion.
Also in the ostensive proof it is not necessary that the conclusion
should be known, nor that one should suppose beforehand that it is
true or not: in the other it is necessary to suppose beforehand that
it is not true. It makes no difference whether the conclusion is affirmative
or negative; the method is the same in both cases. Everything which
is concluded ostensively can be proved per impossibile, and that which
is proved per impossibile can be proved ostensively, through the same
terms. Whenever the syllogism is formed in the first figure, the truth
will be found in the middle or the last figure, if negative in the
middle, if affirmative in the last. Whenever the syllogism is formed
in the middle figure, the truth will be found in the first, whatever
the problem may be. Whenever the syllogism is formed in the last figure,
the truth will be found in the first and middle figures, if affirmative
in first, if negative in the middle. Suppose that A has been proved
to belong to no B, or not to all B, through the first figure. Then
the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to some B, and the original
premisses that C belongs to all A and to no B. For thus the syllogism
was made and the impossible conclusion reached. But this is the middle
figure, if C belongs to all A and to no B. And it is clear from these
premisses that A belongs to no B. Similarly if has been proved not
to belong to all B. For the hypothesis is that A belongs to all B;
and the original premisses are that C belongs to all A but not to
all B. Similarly too, if the premiss CA should be negative: for thus
also we have the middle figure. Again suppose it has been proved that
A belongs to some B. The hypothesis here is that is that A belongs
to no B; and the original premisses that B belongs to all C, and A
either to all or to some C: for in this way we shall get what is impossible.
But if A and B belong to all C, we have the last figure. And it is
clear from these premisses that A must belong to some B. Similarly
if B or A should be assumed to belong to some C. 

Again suppose it has been proved in the middle figure that A belongs
to all B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A belongs not to
all B, and the original premisses that A belongs to all C, and C to
all B: for thus we shall get what is impossible. But if A belongs
to all C, and C to all B, we have the first figure. Similarly if it
has been proved that A belongs to some B: for the hypothesis then
must have been that A belongs to no B, and the original premisses
that A belongs to all C, and C to some B. If the syllogism is negative,
the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to some B, and the original
premisses that A belongs to no C, and C to all B, so that the first
figure results. If the syllogism is not universal, but proof has been
given that A does not belong to some B, we may infer in the same way.
The hypothesis is that A belongs to all B, the original premisses
that A belongs to no C, and C belongs to some B: for thus we get the
first figure. 

Again suppose it has been proved in the third figure that A belongs
to all B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A belongs not to
all B, and the original premisses that C belongs to all B, and A belongs
to all C; for thus we shall get what is impossible. And the original
premisses form the first figure. Similarly if the demonstration establishes
a particular proposition: the hypothesis then must have been that
A belongs to no B, and the original premisses that C belongs to some
B, and A to all C. If the syllogism is negative, the hypothesis must
have been that A belongs to some B, and the original premisses that
C belongs to no A and to all B, and this is the middle figure. Similarly
if the demonstration is not universal. The hypothesis will then be
that A belongs to all B, the premisses that C belongs to no A and
to some B: and this is the middle figure. 

It is clear then that it is possible through the same terms to prove
each of the problems ostensively as well. Similarly it will be possible
if the syllogisms are ostensive to reduce them ad impossibile in the
terms which have been taken, whenever the contradictory of the conclusion
of the ostensive syllogism is taken as a premiss. For the syllogisms
become identical with those which are obtained by means of conversion,
so that we obtain immediately the figures through which each problem
will be solved. It is clear then that every thesis can be proved in
both ways, i.e. per impossibile and ostensively, and it is not possible
to separate one method from the other. 

Part 15

In what figure it is possible to draw a conclusion from premisses
which are opposed, and in what figure this is not possible, will be
made clear in this way. Verbally four kinds of opposition are possible,
viz. universal affirmative to universal negative, universal affirmative
to particular negative, particular affirmative to universal negative,
and particular affirmative to particular negative: but really there
are only three: for the particular affirmative is only verbally opposed
to the particular negative. Of the genuine opposites I call those
which are universal contraries, the universal affirmative and the
universal negative, e.g. 'every science is good', 'no science is good';
the others I call contradictories. 

In the first figure no syllogism whether affirmative or negative can
be made out of opposed premisses: no affirmative syllogism is possible
because both premisses must be affirmative, but opposites are, the
one affirmative, the other negative: no negative syllogism is possible
because opposites affirm and deny the same predicate of the same subject,
and the middle term in the first figure is not predicated of both
extremes, but one thing is denied of it, and it is affirmed of something
else: but such premisses are not opposed. 

In the middle figure a syllogism can be made both oLcontradictories
and of contraries. Let A stand for good, let B and C stand for science.
If then one assumes that every science is good, and no science is
good, A belongs to all B and to no C, so that B belongs to no C: no
science then is a science. Similarly if after taking 'every science
is good' one took 'the science of medicine is not good'; for A belongs
to all B but to no C, so that a particular science will not be a science.
Again, a particular science will not be a science if A belongs to
all C but to no B, and B is science, C medicine, and A supposition:
for after taking 'no science is supposition', one has assumed that
a particular science is supposition. This syllogism differs from the
preceding because the relations between the terms are reversed: before,
the affirmative statement concerned B, now it concerns C. Similarly
if one premiss is not universal: for the middle term is always that
which is stated negatively of one extreme, and affirmatively of the
other. Consequently it is possible that contradictories may lead to
a conclusion, though not always or in every mood, but only if the
terms subordinate to the middle are such that they are either identical
or related as whole to part. Otherwise it is impossible: for the premisses
cannot anyhow be either contraries or contradictories. 

In the third figure an affirmative syllogism can never be made out
of opposite premisses, for the reason given in reference to the first
figure; but a negative syllogism is possible whether the terms are
universal or not. Let B and C stand for science, A for medicine. If
then one should assume that all medicine is science and that no medicine
is science, he has assumed that B belongs to all A and C to no A,
so that a particular science will not be a science. Similarly if the
premiss BA is not assumed universally. For if some medicine is science
and again no medicine is science, it results that some science is
not science, The premisses are contrary if the terms are taken universally;
if one is particular, they are contradictory. 

We must recognize that it is possible to take opposites in the way
we said, viz. 'all science is good' and 'no science is good' or 'some
science is not good'. This does not usually escape notice. But it
is possible to establish one part of a contradiction through other
premisses, or to assume it in the way suggested in the Topics. Since
there are three oppositions to affirmative statements, it follows
that opposite statements may be assumed as premisses in six ways;
we may have either universal affirmative and negative, or universal
affirmative and particular negative, or particular affirmative and
universal negative, and the relations between the terms may be reversed;
e.g. A may belong to all B and to no C, or to all C and to no B, or
to all of the one, not to all of the other; here too the relation
between the terms may be reversed. Similarly in the third figure.
So it is clear in how many ways and in what figures a syllogism can
be made by means of premisses which are opposed. 

It is clear too that from false premisses it is possible to draw a
true conclusion, as has been said before, but it is not possible if
the premisses are opposed. For the syllogism is always contrary to
the fact, e.g. if a thing is good, it is proved that it is not good,
if an animal, that it is not an animal because the syllogism springs
out of a contradiction and the terms presupposed are either identical
or related as whole and part. It is evident also that in fallacious
reasonings nothing prevents a contradiction to the hypothesis from
resulting, e.g. if something is odd, it is not odd. For the syllogism
owed its contrariety to its contradictory premisses; if we assume
such premisses we shall get a result that contradicts our hypothesis.
But we must recognize that contraries cannot be inferred from a single
syllogism in such a way that we conclude that what is not good is
good, or anything of that sort unless a self-contradictory premiss
is at once assumed, e.g. 'every animal is white and not white', and
we proceed 'man is an animal'. Either we must introduce the contradiction
by an additional assumption, assuming, e.g., that every science is
supposition, and then assuming 'Medicine is a science, but none of
it is supposition' (which is the mode in which refutations are made),
or we must argue from two syllogisms. In no other way than this, as
was said before, is it possible that the premisses should be really
contrary. 

Part 16

To beg and assume the original question is a species of failure to
demonstrate the problem proposed; but this happens in many ways. A
man may not reason syllogistically at all, or he may argue from premisses
which are less known or equally unknown, or he may establish the antecedent
by means of its consequents; for demonstration proceeds from what
is more certain and is prior. Now begging the question is none of
these: but since we get to know some things naturally through themselves,
and other things by means of something else (the first principles
through themselves, what is subordinate to them through something
else), whenever a man tries to prove what is not self-evident by means
of itself, then he begs the original question. This may be done by
assuming what is in question at once; it is also possible to make
a transition to other things which would naturally be proved through
the thesis proposed, and demonstrate it through them, e.g. if A should
be proved through B, and B through C, though it was natural that C
should be proved through A: for it turns out that those who reason
thus are proving A by means of itself. This is what those persons
do who suppose that they are constructing parallel straight lines:
for they fail to see that they are assuming facts which it is impossible
to demonstrate unless the parallels exist. So it turns out that those
who reason thus merely say a particular thing is, if it is: in this
way everything will be self-evident. But that is impossible.

If then it is uncertain whether A belongs to C, and also whether A
belongs to B, and if one should assume that A does belong to B, it
is not yet clear whether he begs the original question, but it is
evident that he is not demonstrating: for what is as uncertain as
the question to be answered cannot be a principle of a demonstration.
If however B is so related to C that they are identical, or if they
are plainly convertible, or the one belongs to the other, the original
question is begged. For one might equally well prove that A belongs
to B through those terms if they are convertible. But if they are
not convertible, it is the fact that they are not that prevents such
a demonstration, not the method of demonstrating. But if one were
to make the conversion, then he would be doing what we have described
and effecting a reciprocal proof with three propositions.

Similarly if he should assume that B belongs to C, this being as uncertain
as the question whether A belongs to C, the question is not yet begged,
but no demonstration is made. If however A and B are identical either
because they are convertible or because A follows B, then the question
is begged for the same reason as before. For we have explained the
meaning of begging the question, viz. proving that which is not self-evident
by means of itself. 

If then begging the question is proving what is not self-evident by
means of itself, in other words failing to prove when the failure
is due to the thesis to be proved and the premiss through which it
is proved being equally uncertain, either because predicates which
are identical belong to the same subject, or because the same predicate
belongs to subjects which are identical, the question may be begged
in the middle and third figures in both ways, though, if the syllogism
is affirmative, only in the third and first figures. If the syllogism
is negative, the question is begged when identical predicates are
denied of the same subject; and both premisses do not beg the question
indifferently (in a similar way the question may be begged in the
middle figure), because the terms in negative syllogisms are not convertible.
In scientific demonstrations the question is begged when the terms
are really related in the manner described, in dialectical arguments
when they are according to common opinion so related. 

Part 17

The objection that 'this is not the reason why the result is false',
which we frequently make in argument, is made primarily in the case
of a reductio ad impossibile, to rebut the proposition which was being
proved by the reduction. For unless a man has contradicted this proposition
he will not say, 'False cause', but urge that something false has
been assumed in the earlier parts of the argument; nor will he use
the formula in the case of an ostensive proof; for here what one denies
is not assumed as a premiss. Further when anything is refuted ostensively
by the terms ABC, it cannot be objected that the syllogism does not
depend on the assumption laid down. For we use the expression 'false
cause', when the syllogism is concluded in spite of the refutation
of this position; but that is not possible in ostensive proofs: since
if an assumption is refuted, a syllogism can no longer be drawn in
reference to it. It is clear then that the expression 'false cause'
can only be used in the case of a reductio ad impossibile, and when
the original hypothesis is so related to the impossible conclusion,
that the conclusion results indifferently whether the hypothesis is
made or not. The most obvious case of the irrelevance of an assumption
to a conclusion which is false is when a syllogism drawn from middle
terms to an impossible conclusion is independent of the hypothesis,
as we have explained in the Topics. For to put that which is not the
cause as the cause, is just this: e.g. if a man, wishing to prove
that the diagonal of the square is incommensurate with the side, should
try to prove Zeno's theorem that motion is impossible, and so establish
a reductio ad impossibile: for Zeno's false theorem has no connexion
at all with the original assumption. Another case is where the impossible
conclusion is connected with the hypothesis, but does not result from
it. This may happen whether one traces the connexion upwards or downwards,
e.g. if it is laid down that A belongs to B, B to C, and C to D, and
it should be false that B belongs to D: for if we eliminated A and
assumed all the same that B belongs to C and C to D, the false conclusion
would not depend on the original hypothesis. Or again trace the connexion
upwards; e.g. suppose that A belongs to B, E to A and F to E, it being
false that F belongs to A. In this way too the impossible conclusion
would result, though the original hypothesis were eliminated. But
the impossible conclusion ought to be connected with the original
terms: in this way it will depend on the hypothesis, e.g. when one
traces the connexion downwards, the impossible conclusion must be
connected with that term which is predicate in the hypothesis: for
if it is impossible that A should belong to D, the false conclusion
will no longer result after A has been eliminated. If one traces the
connexion upwards, the impossible conclusion must be connected with
that term which is subject in the hypothesis: for if it is impossible
that F should belong to B, the impossible conclusion will disappear
if B is eliminated. Similarly when the syllogisms are negative.

It is clear then that when the impossibility is not related to the
original terms, the false conclusion does not result on account of
the assumption. Or perhaps even so it may sometimes be independent.
For if it were laid down that A belongs not to B but to K, and that
K belongs to C and C to D, the impossible conclusion would still stand.
Similarly if one takes the terms in an ascending series. Consequently
since the impossibility results whether the first assumption is suppressed
or not, it would appear to be independent of that assumption. Or perhaps
we ought not to understand the statement that the false conclusion
results independently of the assumption, in the sense that if something
else were supposed the impossibility would result; but rather we mean
that when the first assumption is eliminated, the same impossibility
results through the remaining premisses; since it is not perhaps absurd
that the same false result should follow from several hypotheses,
e.g. that parallels meet, both on the assumption that the interior
angle is greater than the exterior and on the assumption that a triangle
contains more than two right angles. 

Part 18

A false argument depends on the first false statement in it. Every
syllogism is made out of two or more premisses. If then the false
conclusion is drawn from two premisses, one or both of them must be
false: for (as we proved) a false syllogism cannot be drawn from two
premisses. But if the premisses are more than two, e.g. if C is established
through A and B, and these through D, E, F, and G, one of these higher
propositions must be false, and on this the argument depends: for
A and B are inferred by means of D, E, F, and G. Therefore the conclusion
and the error results from one of them. 

Part 19

In order to avoid having a syllogism drawn against us we must take
care, whenever an opponent asks us to admit the reason without the
conclusions, not to grant him the same term twice over in his premisses,
since we know that a syllogism cannot be drawn without a middle term,
and that term which is stated more than once is the middle. How we
ought to watch the middle in reference to each conclusion, is evident
from our knowing what kind of thesis is proved in each figure. This
will not escape us since we know how we are maintaining the argument.

That which we urge men to beware of in their admissions, they ought
in attack to try to conceal. This will be possible first, if, instead
of drawing the conclusions of preliminary syllogisms, they take the
necessary premisses and leave the conclusions in the dark; secondly
if instead of inviting assent to propositions which are closely connected
they take as far as possible those that are not connected by middle
terms. For example suppose that A is to be inferred to be true of
F, B, C, D, and E being middle terms. One ought then to ask whether
A belongs to B, and next whether D belongs to E, instead of asking
whether B belongs to C; after that he may ask whether B belongs to
C, and so on. If the syllogism is drawn through one middle term, he
ought to begin with that: in this way he will most likely deceive
his opponent. 

Part 20

Since we know when a syllogism can be formed and how its terms must
be related, it is clear when refutation will be possible and when
impossible. A refutation is possible whether everything is conceded,
or the answers alternate (one, I mean, being affirmative, the other
negative). For as has been shown a syllogism is possible whether the
terms are related in affirmative propositions or one proposition is
affirmative, the other negative: consequently, if what is laid down
is contrary to the conclusion, a refutation must take place: for a
refutation is a syllogism which establishes the contradictory. But
if nothing is conceded, a refutation is impossible: for no syllogism
is possible (as we saw) when all the terms are negative: therefore
no refutation is possible. For if a refutation were possible, a syllogism
must be possible; although if a syllogism is possible it does not
follow that a refutation is possible. Similarly refutation is not
possible if nothing is conceded universally: since the fields of refutation
and syllogism are defined in the same way. 

Part 21

It sometimes happens that just as we are deceived in the arrangement
of the terms, so error may arise in our thought about them, e.g. if
it is possible that the same predicate should belong to more than
one subject immediately, but although knowing the one, a man may forget
the other and think the opposite true. Suppose that A belongs to B
and to C in virtue of their nature, and that B and C belong to all
D in the same way. If then a man thinks that A belongs to all B, and
B to D, but A to no C, and C to all D, he will both know and not know
the same thing in respect of the same thing. Again if a man were to
make a mistake about the members of a single series; e.g. suppose
A belongs to B, B to C, and C to D, but some one thinks that A belongs
to all B, but to no C: he will both know that A belongs to D, and
think that it does not. Does he then maintain after this simply that
what he knows, he does not think? For he knows in a way that A belongs
to C through B, since the part is included in the whole; so that what
he knows in a way, this he maintains he does not think at all: but
that is impossible. 

In the former case, where the middle term does not belong to the same
series, it is not possible to think both the premisses with reference
to each of the two middle terms: e.g. that A belongs to all B, but
to no C, and both B and C belong to all D. For it turns out that the
first premiss of the one syllogism is either wholly or partially contrary
to the first premiss of the other. For if he thinks that A belongs
to everything to which B belongs, and he knows that B belongs to D,
then he knows that A belongs to D. Consequently if again he thinks
that A belongs to nothing to which C belongs, he thinks that A does
not belong to some of that to which B belongs; but if he thinks that
A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and again thinks that
A does not belong to some of that to which B belongs, these beliefs
are wholly or partially contrary. In this way then it is not possible
to think; but nothing prevents a man thinking one premiss of each
syllogism of both premisses of one of the two syllogisms: e.g. A belongs
to all B, and B to D, and again A belongs to no C. An error of this
kind is similar to the error into which we fall concerning particulars:
e.g. if A belongs to all B, and B to all C, A will belong to all C.
If then a man knows that A belongs to everything to which B belongs,
he knows that A belongs to C. But nothing prevents his being ignorant
that C exists; e.g. let A stand for two right angles, B for triangle,
C for a particular diagram of a triangle. A man might think that C
did not exist, though he knew that every triangle contains two right
angles; consequently he will know and not know the same thing at the
same time. For the expression 'to know that every triangle has its
angles equal to two right angles' is ambiguous, meaning to have the
knowledge either of the universal or of the particulars. Thus then
he knows that C contains two right angles with a knowledge of the
universal, but not with a knowledge of the particulars; consequently
his knowledge will not be contrary to his ignorance. The argument
in the Meno that learning is recollection may be criticized in a similar
way. For it never happens that a man starts with a foreknowledge of
the particular, but along with the process of being led to see the
general principle he receives a knowledge of the particulars, by an
act (as it were) of recognition. For we know some things directly;
e.g. that the angles are equal to two right angles, if we know that
the figure is a triangle. Similarly in all other cases. 

By a knowledge of the universal then we see the particulars, but we
do not know them by the kind of knowledge which is proper to them;
consequently it is possible that we may make mistakes about them,
but not that we should have the knowledge and error that are contrary
to one another: rather we have the knowledge of the universal but
make a mistake in apprehending the particular. Similarly in the cases
stated above. The error in respect of the middle term is not contrary
to the knowledge obtained through the syllogism, nor is the thought
in respect of one middle term contrary to that in respect of the other.
Nothing prevents a man who knows both that A belongs to the whole
of B, and that B again belongs to C, thinking that A does not belong
to C, e.g. knowing that every mule is sterile and that this is a mule,
and thinking that this animal is with foal: for he does not know that
A belongs to C, unless he considers the two propositions together.
So it is evident that if he knows the one and does not know the other,
he will fall into error. And this is the relation of knowledge of
the universal to knowledge of the particular. For we know no sensible
thing, once it has passed beyond the range of our senses, even if
we happen to have perceived it, except by means of the universal and
the possession of the knowledge which is proper to the particular,
but without the actual exercise of that knowledge. For to know is
used in three senses: it may mean either to have knowledge of the
universal or to have knowledge proper to the matter in hand or to
exercise such knowledge: consequently three kinds of error also are
possible. Nothing then prevents a man both knowing and being mistaken
about the same thing, provided that his knowledge and his error are
not contrary. And this happens also to the man whose knowledge is
limited to each of the premisses and who has not previously considered
the particular question. For when he thinks that the mule is with
foal he has not the knowledge in the sense of its actual exercise,
nor on the other hand has his thought caused an error contrary to
his knowledge: for the error contrary to the knowledge of the universal
would be a syllogism. 

But he who thinks the essence of good is the essence of bad will think
the same thing to be the essence of good and the essence of bad. Let
A stand for the essence of good and B for the essence of bad, and
again C for the essence of good. Since then he thinks B and C identical,
he will think that C is B, and similarly that B is A, consequently
that C is A. For just as we saw that if B is true of all of which
C is true, and A is true of all of which B is true, A is true of C,
similarly with the word 'think'. Similarly also with the word 'is';
for we saw that if C is the same as B, and B as A, C is the same as
A. Similarly therefore with 'opine'. Perhaps then this is necessary
if a man will grant the first point. But presumably that is false,
that any one could suppose the essence of good to be the essence of
bad, save incidentally. For it is possible to think this in many different
ways. But we must consider this matter better. 

Part 22

Whenever the extremes are convertible it is necessary that the middle
should be convertible with both. For if A belongs to C through B,
then if A and C are convertible and C belongs everything to which
A belongs, B is convertible with A, and B belongs to everything to
which A belongs, through C as middle, and C is convertible with B
through A as middle. Similarly if the conclusion is negative, e.g.
if B belongs to C, but A does not belong to B, neither will A belong
to C. If then B is convertible with A, C will be convertible with
A. Suppose B does not belong to A; neither then will C: for ex hypothesi
B belonged to all C. And if C is convertible with B, B is convertible
also with A, for C is said of that of all of which B is said. And
if C is convertible in relation to A and to B, B also is convertible
in relation to A. For C belongs to that to which B belongs: but C
does not belong to that to which A belongs. And this alone starts
from the conclusion; the preceding moods do not do so as in the affirmative
syllogism. Again if A and B are convertible, and similarly C and D,
and if A or C must belong to anything whatever, then B and D will
be such that one or other belongs to anything whatever. For since
B belongs to that to which A belongs, and D belongs to that to which
C belongs, and since A or C belongs to everything, but not together,
it is clear that B or D belongs to everything, but not together. For
example if that which is uncreated is incorruptible and that which
is incorruptible is uncreated, it is necessary that what is created
should be corruptible and what is corruptible should have been created.
For two syllogisms have been put together. Again if A or B belongs
to everything and if C or D belongs to everything, but they cannot
belong together, then when A and C are convertible B and D are convertible.
For if B does not belong to something to which D belongs, it is clear
that A belongs to it. But if A then C: for they are convertible. Therefore
C and D belong together. But this is impossible. When A belongs to
the whole of B and to C and is affirmed of nothing else, and B also
belongs to all C, it is necessary that A and B should be convertible:
for since A is said of B and C only, and B is affirmed both of itself
and of C, it is clear that B will be said of everything of which A
is said, except A itself. Again when A and B belong to the whole of
C, and C is convertible with B, it is necessary that A should belong
to all B: for since A belongs to all C, and C to B by conversion,
A will belong to all B. 

When, of two opposites A and B, A is preferable to B, and similarly
D is preferable to C, then if A and C together are preferable to B
and D together, A must be preferable to D. For A is an object of desire
to the same extent as B is an object of aversion, since they are opposites:
and C is similarly related to D, since they also are opposites. If
then A is an object of desire to the same extent as D, B is an object
of aversion to the same extent as C (since each is to the same extent
as each-the one an object of aversion, the other an object of desire).
Therefore both A and C together, and B and D together, will be equally
objects of desire or aversion. But since A and C are preferable to
B and D, A cannot be equally desirable with D; for then B along with
D would be equally desirable with A along with C. But if D is preferable
to A, then B must be less an object of aversion than C: for the less
is opposed to the less. But the greater good and lesser evil are preferable
to the lesser good and greater evil: the whole BD then is preferable
to the whole AC. But ex hypothesi this is not so. A then is preferable
to D, and C consequently is less an object of aversion than B. If
then every lover in virtue of his love would prefer A, viz. that the
beloved should be such as to grant a favour, and yet should not grant
it (for which C stands), to the beloved's granting the favour (represented
by D) without being such as to grant it (represented by B), it is
clear that A (being of such a nature) is preferable to granting the
favour. To receive affection then is preferable in love to sexual
intercourse. Love then is more dependent on friendship than on intercourse.
And if it is most dependent on receiving affection, then this is its
end. Intercourse then either is not an end at all or is an end relative
to the further end, the receiving of affection. And indeed the same
is true of the other desires and arts. 

Part 23

It is clear then how the terms are related in conversion, and in respect
of being in a higher degree objects of aversion or of desire. We must
now state that not only dialectical and demonstrative syllogisms are
formed by means of the aforesaid figures, but also rhetorical syllogisms
and in general any form of persuasion, however it may be presented.
For every belief comes either through syllogism or from induction.

Now induction, or rather the syllogism which springs out of induction,
consists in establishing syllogistically a relation between one extreme
and the middle by means of the other extreme, e.g. if B is the middle
term between A and C, it consists in proving through C that A belongs
to B. For this is the manner in which we make inductions. For example
let A stand for long-lived, B for bileless, and C for the particular
long-lived animals, e.g. man, horse, mule. A then belongs to the whole
of C: for whatever is bileless is long-lived. But B also ('not possessing
bile') belongs to all C. If then C is convertible with B, and the
middle term is not wider in extension, it is necessary that A should
belong to B. For it has already been proved that if two things belong
to the same thing, and the extreme is convertible with one of them,
then the other predicate will belong to the predicate that is converted.
But we must apprehend C as made up of all the particulars. For induction
proceeds through an enumeration of all the cases. 

Such is the syllogism which establishes the first and immediate premiss:
for where there is a middle term the syllogism proceeds through the
middle term; when there is no middle term, through induction. And
in a way induction is opposed to syllogism: for the latter proves
the major term to belong to the third term by means of the middle,
the former proves the major to belong to the middle by means of the
third. In the order of nature, syllogism through the middle term is
prior and better known, but syllogism through induction is clearer
to us. 

Part 24

We have an 'example' when the major term is proved to belong to the
middle by means of a term which resembles the third. It ought to be
known both that the middle belongs to the third term, and that the
first belongs to that which resembles the third. For example let A
be evil, B making war against neighbours, C Athenians against Thebans,
D Thebans against Phocians. If then we wish to prove that to fight
with the Thebans is an evil, we must assume that to fight against
neighbours is an evil. Evidence of this is obtained from similar cases,
e.g. that the war against the Phocians was an evil to the Thebans.
Since then to fight against neighbours is an evil, and to fight against
the Thebans is to fight against neighbours, it is clear that to fight
against the Thebans is an evil. Now it is clear that B belongs to
C and to D (for both are cases of making war upon one's neighbours)
and that A belongs to D (for the war against the Phocians did not
turn out well for the Thebans): but that A belongs to B will be proved
through D. Similarly if the belief in the relation of the middle term
to the extreme should be produced by several similar cases. Clearly
then to argue by example is neither like reasoning from part to whole,
nor like reasoning from whole to part, but rather reasoning from part
to part, when both particulars are subordinate to the same term, and
one of them is known. It differs from induction, because induction
starting from all the particular cases proves (as we saw) that the
major term belongs to the middle, and does not apply the syllogistic
conclusion to the minor term, whereas argument by example does make
this application and does not draw its proof from all the particular
cases. 

Part 25

By reduction we mean an argument in which the first term clearly belongs
to the middle, but the relation of the middle to the last term is
uncertain though equally or more probable than the conclusion; or
again an argument in which the terms intermediate between the last
term and the middle are few. For in any of these cases it turns out
that we approach more nearly to knowledge. For example let A stand
for what can be taught, B for knowledge, C for justice. Now it is
clear that knowledge can be taught: but it is uncertain whether virtue
is knowledge. If now the statement BC is equally or more probable
than Ac, we have a reduction: for we are nearer to knowledge, since
we have taken a new term, being so far without knowledge that A belongs
to C. Or again suppose that the terms intermediate between B and C
are few: for thus too we are nearer knowledge. For example let D stand
for squaring, E for rectilinear figure, F for circle. If there were
only one term intermediate between E and F (viz. that the circle is
made equal to a rectilinear figure by the help of lunules), we should
be near to knowledge. But when BC is not more probable than AC, and
the intermediate terms are not few, I do not call this reduction:
nor again when the statement BC is immediate: for such a statement
is knowledge. 

Part 26

An objection is a premiss contrary to a premiss. It differs from a
premiss, because it may be particular, but a premiss either cannot
be particular at all or not in universal syllogisms. An objection
is brought in two ways and through two figures; in two ways because
every objection is either universal or particular, by two figures
because objections are brought in opposition to the premiss, and opposites
can be proved only in the first and third figures. If a man maintains
a universal affirmative, we reply with a universal or a particular
negative; the former is proved from the first figure, the latter from
the third. For example let stand for there being a single science,
B for contraries. If a man premises that contraries are subjects of
a single science, the objection may be either that opposites are never
subjects of a single science, and contraries are opposites, so that
we get the first figure, or that the knowable and the unknowable are
not subjects of a single science: this proof is in the third figure:
for it is true of C (the knowable and the unknowable) that they are
contraries, and it is false that they are the subjects of a single
science. 

Similarly if the premiss objected to is negative. For if a man maintains
that contraries are not subjects of a single science, we reply either
that all opposites or that certain contraries, e.g. what is healthy
and what is sickly, are subjects of the same science: the former argument
issues from the first, the latter from the third figure.

In general if a man urges a universal objection he must frame his
contradiction with reference to the universal of the terms taken by
his opponent, e.g. if a man maintains that contraries are not subjects
of the same science, his opponent must reply that there is a single
science of all opposites. Thus we must have the first figure: for
the term which embraces the original subject becomes the middle term.

If the objection is particular, the objector must frame his contradiction
with reference to a term relatively to which the subject of his opponent's
premiss is universal, e.g. he will point out that the knowable and
the unknowable are not subjects of the same science: 'contraries'
is universal relatively to these. And we have the third figure: for
the particular term assumed is middle, e.g. the knowable and the unknowable.
Premisses from which it is possible to draw the contrary conclusion
are what we start from when we try to make objections. Consequently
we bring objections in these figures only: for in them only are opposite
syllogisms possible, since the second figure cannot produce an affirmative
conclusion. 

Besides, an objection in the middle figure would require a fuller
argument, e.g. if it should not be granted that A belongs to B, because
C does not follow B. This can be made clear only by other premisses.
But an objection ought not to turn off into other things, but have
its new premiss quite clear immediately. For this reason also this
is the only figure from which proof by signs cannot be obtained.

We must consider later the other kinds of objection, namely the objection
from contraries, from similars, and from common opinion, and inquire
whether a particular objection cannot be elicited from the first figure
or a negative objection from the second. 

Part 27

A probability and a sign are not identical, but a probability is a
generally approved proposition: what men know to happen or not to
happen, to be or not to be, for the most part thus and thus, is a
probability, e.g. 'the envious hate', 'the beloved show affection'.
A sign means a demonstrative proposition necessary or generally approved:
for anything such that when it is another thing is, or when it has
come into being the other has come into being before or after, is
a sign of the other's being or having come into being. Now an enthymeme
is a syllogism starting from probabilities or signs, and a sign may
be taken in three ways, corresponding to the position of the middle
term in the figures. For it may be taken as in the first figure or
the second or the third. For example the proof that a woman is with
child because she has milk is in the first figure: for to have milk
is the middle term. Let A represent to be with child, B to have milk,
C woman. The proof that wise men are good, since Pittacus is good,
comes through the last figure. Let A stand for good, B for wise men,
C for Pittacus. It is true then to affirm both A and B of C: only
men do not say the latter, because they know it, though they state
the former. The proof that a woman is with child because she is pale
is meant to come through the middle figure: for since paleness follows
women with child and is a concomitant of this woman, people suppose
it has been proved that she is with child. Let A stand for paleness,
B for being with child, C for woman. Now if the one proposition is
stated, we have only a sign, but if the other is stated as well, a
syllogism, e.g. 'Pittacus is generous, since ambitious men are generous
and Pittacus is ambitious.' Or again 'Wise men are good, since Pittacus
is not only good but wise.' In this way then syllogisms are formed,
only that which proceeds through the first figure is irrefutable if
it is true (for it is universal), that which proceeds through the
last figure is refutable even if the conclusion is true, since the
syllogism is not universal nor correlative to the matter in question:
for though Pittacus is good, it is not therefore necessary that all
other wise men should be good. But the syllogism which proceeds through
the middle figure is always refutable in any case: for a syllogism
can never be formed when the terms are related in this way: for though
a woman with child is pale, and this woman also is pale, it is not
necessary that she should be with child. Truth then may be found in
signs whatever their kind, but they have the differences we have stated.

We must either divide signs in the way stated, and among them designate
the middle term as the index (for people call that the index which
makes us know, and the middle term above all has this character),
or else we must call the arguments derived from the extremes signs,
that derived from the middle term the index: for that which is proved
through the first figure is most generally accepted and most true.

It is possible to infer character from features, if it is granted
that the body and the soul are changed together by the natural affections:
I say 'natural', for though perhaps by learning music a man has made
some change in his soul, this is not one of those affections which
are natural to us; rather I refer to passions and desires when I speak
of natural emotions. If then this were granted and also that for each
change there is a corresponding sign, and we could state the affection
and sign proper to each kind of animal, we shall be able to infer
character from features. For if there is an affection which belongs
properly to an individual kind, e.g. courage to lions, it is necessary
that there should be a sign of it: for ex hypothesi body and soul
are affected together. Suppose this sign is the possession of large
extremities: this may belong to other kinds also though not universally.
For the sign is proper in the sense stated, because the affection
is proper to the whole kind, though not proper to it alone, according
to our usual manner of speaking. The same thing then will be found
in another kind, and man may be brave, and some other kinds of animal
as well. They will then have the sign: for ex hypothesi there is one
sign corresponding to each affection. If then this is so, and we can
collect signs of this sort in these animals which have only one affection
proper to them-but each affection has its sign, since it is necessary
that it should have a single sign-we shall then be able to infer character
from features. But if the kind as a whole has two properties, e.g.
if the lion is both brave and generous, how shall we know which of
the signs which are its proper concomitants is the sign of a particular
affection? Perhaps if both belong to some other kind though not to
the whole of it, and if, in those kinds in which each is found though
not in the whole of their members, some members possess one of the
affections and not the other: e.g. if a man is brave but not generous,
but possesses, of the two signs, large extremities, it is clear that
this is the sign of courage in the lion also. To judge character from
features, then, is possible in the first figure if the middle term
is convertible with the first extreme, but is wider than the third
term and not convertible with it: e.g. let A stand for courage, B
for large extremities, and C for lion. B then belongs to everything
to which C belongs, but also to others. But A belongs to everything
to which B belongs, and to nothing besides, but is convertible with
B: otherwise, there would not be a single sign correlative with each
affection. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

Rhetoric is the counterpart of Dialectic. Both alike are concerned
with such things as come, more or less, within the general ken of
all men and belong to no definite science. Accordingly all men make
use, more or less, of both; for to a certain extent all men attempt
to discuss statements and to maintain them, to defend themselves and
to attack others. Ordinary people do this either at random or through
practice and from acquired habit. Both ways being possible, the subject
can plainly be handled systematically, for it is possible to inquire
the reason why some speakers succeed through practice and others spontaneously;
and every one will at once agree that such an inquiry is the function
of an art. 

Now, the framers of the current treatises on rhetoric have constructed
but a small portion of that art. The modes of persuasion are the only
true constituents of the art: everything else is merely accessory.
These writers, however, say nothing about enthymemes, which are the
substance of rhetorical persuasion, but deal mainly with non-essentials.
The arousing of prejudice, pity, anger, and similar emotions has nothing
to do with the essential facts, but is merely a personal appeal to
the man who is judging the case. Consequently if the rules for trials
which are now laid down some states-especially in well-governed states-were
applied everywhere, such people would have nothing to say. All men,
no doubt, think that the laws should prescribe such rules, but some,
as in the court of Areopagus, give practical effect to their thoughts
and forbid talk about non-essentials. This is sound law and custom.
It is not right to pervert the judge by moving him to anger or envy
or pity-one might as well warp a carpenter's rule before using it.
Again, a litigant has clearly nothing to do but to show that the alleged
fact is so or is not so, that it has or has not happened. As to whether
a thing is important or unimportant, just or unjust, the judge must
surely refuse to take his instructions from the litigants: he must
decide for himself all such points as the law-giver has not already
defined for him. 

Now, it is of great moment that well-drawn laws should themselves
define all the points they possibly can and leave as few as may be
to the decision of the judges; and this for several reasons. First,
to find one man, or a few men, who are sensible persons and capable
of legislating and administering justice is easier than to find a
large number. Next, laws are made after long consideration, whereas
decisions in the courts are given at short notice, which makes it
hard for those who try the case to satisfy the claims of justice and
expediency. The weightiest reason of all is that the decision of the
lawgiver is not particular but prospective and general, whereas members
of the assembly and the jury find it their duty to decide on definite
cases brought before them. They will often have allowed themselves
to be so much influenced by feelings of friendship or hatred or self-interest
that they lose any clear vision of the truth and have their judgement
obscured by considerations of personal pleasure or pain. In general,
then, the judge should, we say, be allowed to decide as few things
as possible. But questions as to whether something has happened or
has not happened, will be or will not be, is or is not, must of necessity
be left to the judge, since the lawgiver cannot foresee them. If this
is so, it is evident that any one who lays down rules about other
matters, such as what must be the contents of the 'introduction' or
the 'narration' or any of the other divisions of a speech, is theorizing
about non-essentials as if they belonged to the art. The only question
with which these writers here deal is how to put the judge into a
given frame of mind. About the orator's proper modes of persuasion
they have nothing to tell us; nothing, that is, about how to gain
skill in enthymemes. 

Hence it comes that, although the same systematic principles apply
to political as to forensic oratory, and although the former is a
nobler business, and fitter for a citizen, than that which concerns
the relations of private individuals, these authors say nothing about
political oratory, but try, one and all, to write treatises on the
way to plead in court. The reason for this is that in political oratory
there is less inducement to talk about nonessentials. Political oratory
is less given to unscrupulous practices than forensic, because it
treats of wider issues. In a political debate the man who is forming
a judgement is making a decision about his own vital interests. There
is no need, therefore, to prove anything except that the facts are
what the supporter of a measure maintains they are. In forensic oratory
this is not enough; to conciliate the listener is what pays here.
It is other people's affairs that are to be decided, so that the judges,
intent on their own satisfaction and listening with partiality, surrender
themselves to the disputants instead of judging between them. Hence
in many places, as we have said already, irrelevant speaking is forbidden
in the law-courts: in the public assembly those who have to form a
judgement are themselves well able to guard against that.

It is clear, then, that rhetorical study, in its strict sense, is
concerned with the modes of persuasion. Persuasion is clearly a sort
of demonstration, since we are most fully persuaded when we consider
a thing to have been demonstrated. The orator's demonstration is an
enthymeme, and this is, in general, the most effective of the modes
of persuasion. The enthymeme is a sort of syllogism, and the consideration
of syllogisms of all kinds, without distinction, is the business of
dialectic, either of dialectic as a whole or of one of its branches.
It follows plainly, therefore, that he who is best able to see how
and from what elements a syllogism is produced will also be best skilled
in the enthymeme, when he has further learnt what its subject-matter
is and in what respects it differs from the syllogism of strict logic.
The true and the approximately true are apprehended by the same faculty;
it may also be noted that men have a sufficient natural instinct for
what is true, and usually do arrive at the truth. Hence the man who
makes a good guess at truth is likely to make a good guess at probabilities.

It has now been shown that the ordinary writers on rhetoric treat
of non-essentials; it has also been shown why they have inclined more
towards the forensic branch of oratory. 

Rhetoric is useful (1) because things that are true and things that
are just have a natural tendency to prevail over their opposites,
so that if the decisions of judges are not what they ought to be,
the defeat must be due to the speakers themselves, and they must be
blamed accordingly. Moreover, (2) before some audiences not even the
possession of the exactest knowledge will make it easy for what we
say to produce conviction. For argument based on knowledge implies
instruction, and there are people whom one cannot instruct. Here,
then, we must use, as our modes of persuasion and argument, notions
possessed by everybody, as we observed in the Topics when dealing
with the way to handle a popular audience. Further, (3) we must be
able to employ persuasion, just as strict reasoning can be employed,
on opposite sides of a question, not in order that we may in practice
employ it in both ways (for we must not make people believe what is
wrong), but in order that we may see clearly what the facts are, and
that, if another man argues unfairly, we on our part may be able to
confute him. No other of the arts draws opposite conclusions: dialectic
and rhetoric alone do this. Both these arts draw opposite conclusions
impartially. Nevertheless, the underlying facts do not lend themselves
equally well to the contrary views. No; things that are true and things
that are better are, by their nature, practically always easier to
prove and easier to believe in. Again, (4) it is absurd to hold that
a man ought to be ashamed of being unable to defend himself with his
limbs, but not of being unable to defend himself with speech and reason,
when the use of rational speech is more distinctive of a human being
than the use of his limbs. And if it be objected that one who uses
such power of speech unjustly might do great harm, that is a charge
which may be made in common against all good things except virtue,
and above all against the things that are most useful, as strength,
health, wealth, generalship. A man can confer the greatest of benefits
by a right use of these, and inflict the greatest of injuries by using
them wrongly. 

It is clear, then, that rhetoric is not bound up with a single definite
class of subjects, but is as universal as dialectic; it is clear,
also, that it is useful. It is clear, further, that its function is
not simply to succeed in persuading, but rather to discover the means
of coming as near such success as the circumstances of each particular
case allow. In this it resembles all other arts. For example, it is
not the function of medicine simply to make a man quite healthy, but
to put him as far as may be on the road to health; it is possible
to give excellent treatment even to those who can never enjoy sound
health. Furthermore, it is plain that it is the function of one and
the same art to discern the real and the apparent means of persuasion,
just as it is the function of dialectic to discern the real and the
apparent syllogism. What makes a man a 'sophist' is not his faculty,
but his moral purpose. In rhetoric, however, the term 'rhetorician'
may describe either the speaker's knowledge of the art, or his moral
purpose. In dialectic it is different: a man is a 'sophist' because
he has a certain kind of moral purpose, a 'dialectician' in respect,
not of his moral purpose, but of his faculty. 

Let us now try to give some account of the systematic principles of
Rhetoric itself-of the right method and means of succeeding in the
object we set before us. We must make as it were a fresh start, and
before going further define what rhetoric is. 

Part 2

Rhetoric may be defined as the faculty of observing in any given case
the available means of persuasion. This is not a function of any other
art. Every other art can instruct or persuade about its own particular
subject-matter; for instance, medicine about what is healthy and unhealthy,
geometry about the properties of magnitudes, arithmetic about numbers,
and the same is true of the other arts and sciences. But rhetoric
we look upon as the power of observing the means of persuasion on
almost any subject presented to us; and that is why we say that, in
its technical character, it is not concerned with any special or definite
class of subjects. 

Of the modes of persuasion some belong strictly to the art of rhetoric
and some do not. By the latter I mean such things as are not supplied
by the speaker but are there at the outset-witnesses, evidence given
under torture, written contracts, and so on. By the former I mean
such as we can ourselves construct by means of the principles of rhetoric.
The one kind has merely to be used, the other has to be invented.

Of the modes of persuasion furnished by the spoken word there are
three kinds. The first kind depends on the personal character of the
speaker; the second on putting the audience into a certain frame of
mind; the third on the proof, or apparent proof, provided by the words
of the speech itself. Persuasion is achieved by the speaker's personal
character when the speech is so spoken as to make us think him credible.
We believe good men more fully and more readily than others: this
is true generally whatever the question is, and absolutely true where
exact certainty is impossible and opinions are divided. This kind
of persuasion, like the others, should be achieved by what the speaker
says, not by what people think of his character before he begins to
speak. It is not true, as some writers assume in their treatises on
rhetoric, that the personal goodness revealed by the speaker contributes
nothing to his power of persuasion; on the contrary, his character
may almost be called the most effective means of persuasion he possesses.
Secondly, persuasion may come through the hearers, when the speech
stirs their emotions. Our judgements when we are pleased and friendly
are not the same as when we are pained and hostile. It is towards
producing these effects, as we maintain, that present-day writers
on rhetoric direct the whole of their efforts. This subject shall
be treated in detail when we come to speak of the emotions. Thirdly,
persuasion is effected through the speech itself when we have proved
a truth or an apparent truth by means of the persuasive arguments
suitable to the case in question. 

There are, then, these three means of effecting persuasion. The man
who is to be in command of them must, it is clear, be able (1) to
reason logically, (2) to understand human character and goodness in
their various forms, and (3) to understand the emotions-that is, to
name them and describe them, to know their causes and the way in which
they are excited. It thus appears that rhetoric is an offshoot of
dialectic and also of ethical studies. Ethical studies may fairly
be called political; and for this reason rhetoric masquerades as political
science, and the professors of it as political experts-sometimes from
want of education, sometimes from ostentation, sometimes owing to
other human failings. As a matter of fact, it is a branch of dialectic
and similar to it, as we said at the outset. Neither rhetoric nor
dialectic is the scientific study of any one separate subject: both
are faculties for providing arguments. This is perhaps a sufficient
account of their scope and of how they are related to each other.

With regard to the persuasion achieved by proof or apparent proof:
just as in dialectic there is induction on the one hand and syllogism
or apparent syllogism on the other, so it is in rhetoric. The example
is an induction, the enthymeme is a syllogism, and the apparent enthymeme
is an apparent syllogism. I call the enthymeme a rhetorical syllogism,
and the example a rhetorical induction. Every one who effects persuasion
through proof does in fact use either enthymemes or examples: there
is no other way. And since every one who proves anything at all is
bound to use either syllogisms or inductions (and this is clear to
us from the Analytics), it must follow that enthymemes are syllogisms
and examples are inductions. The difference between example and enthymeme
is made plain by the passages in the Topics where induction and syllogism
have already been discussed. When we base the proof of a proposition
on a number of similar cases, this is induction in dialectic, example
in rhetoric; when it is shown that, certain propositions being true,
a further and quite distinct proposition must also be true in consequence,
whether invariably or usually, this is called syllogism in dialectic,
enthymeme in rhetoric. It is plain also that each of these types of
oratory has its advantages. Types of oratory, I say: for what has
been said in the Methodics applies equally well here; in some oratorical
styles examples prevail, in others enthymemes; and in like manner,
some orators are better at the former and some at the latter. Speeches
that rely on examples are as persuasive as the other kind, but those
which rely on enthymemes excite the louder applause. The sources of
examples and enthymemes, and their proper uses, we will discuss later.
Our next step is to define the processes themselves more clearly.

A statement is persuasive and credible either because it is directly
self-evident or because it appears to be proved from other statements
that are so. In either case it is persuasive because there is somebody
whom it persuades. But none of the arts theorize about individual
cases. Medicine, for instance, does not theorize about what will help
to cure Socrates or Callias, but only about what will help to cure
any or all of a given class of patients: this alone is business: individual
cases are so infinitely various that no systematic knowledge of them
is possible. In the same way the theory of rhetoric is concerned not
with what seems probable to a given individual like Socrates or Hippias,
but with what seems probable to men of a given type; and this is true
of dialectic also. Dialectic does not construct its syllogisms out
of any haphazard materials, such as the fancies of crazy people, but
out of materials that call for discussion; and rhetoric, too, draws
upon the regular subjects of debate. The duty of rhetoric is to deal
with such matters as we deliberate upon without arts or systems to
guide us, in the hearing of persons who cannot take in at a glance
a complicated argument, or follow a long chain of reasoning. The subjects
of our deliberation are such as seem to present us with alternative
possibilities: about things that could not have been, and cannot now
or in the future be, other than they are, nobody who takes them to
be of this nature wastes his time in deliberation. 

It is possible to form syllogisms and draw conclusions from the results
of previous syllogisms; or, on the other hand, from premisses which
have not been thus proved, and at the same time are so little accepted
that they call for proof. Reasonings of the former kind will necessarily
be hard to follow owing to their length, for we assume an audience
of untrained thinkers; those of the latter kind will fail to win assent,
because they are based on premisses that are not generally admitted
or believed. 

The enthymeme and the example must, then, deal with what is in the
main contingent, the example being an induction, and the enthymeme
a syllogism, about such matters. The enthymeme must consist of few
propositions, fewer often than those which make up the normal syllogism.
For if any of these propositions is a familiar fact, there is no need
even to mention it; the hearer adds it himself. Thus, to show that
Dorieus has been victor in a contest for which the prize is a crown,
it is enough to say 'For he has been victor in the Olympic games',
without adding 'And in the Olympic games the prize is a crown', a
fact which everybody knows. 

There are few facts of the 'necessary' type that can form the basis
of rhetorical syllogisms. Most of the things about which we make decisions,
and into which therefore we inquire, present us with alternative possibilities.
For it is about our actions that we deliberate and inquire, and all
our actions have a contingent character; hardly any of them are determined
by necessity. Again, conclusions that state what is merely usual or
possible must be drawn from premisses that do the same, just as 'necessary'
conclusions must be drawn from 'necessary' premisses; this too is
clear to us from the Analytics. It is evident, therefore, that the
propositions forming the basis of enthymemes, though some of them
may be 'necessary', will most of them be only usually true. Now the
materials of enthymemes are Probabilities and Signs, which we can
see must correspond respectively with the propositions that are generally
and those that are necessarily true. A Probability is a thing that
usually happens; not, however, as some definitions would suggest,
anything whatever that usually happens, but only if it belongs to
the class of the 'contingent' or 'variable'. It bears the same relation
to that in respect of which it is probable as the universal bears
to the particular. Of Signs, one kind bears the same relation to the
statement it supports as the particular bears to the universal, the
other the same as the universal bears to the particular. The infallible
kind is a 'complete proof' (tekmerhiou); the fallible kind has no
specific name. By infallible signs I mean those on which syllogisms
proper may be based: and this shows us why this kind of Sign is called
'complete proof': when people think that what they have said cannot
be refuted, they then think that they are bringing forward a 'complete
proof', meaning that the matter has now been demonstrated and completed
(peperhasmeuou); for the word 'perhas' has the same meaning (of 'end'
or 'boundary') as the word 'tekmarh' in the ancient tongue. Now the
one kind of Sign (that which bears to the proposition it supports
the relation of particular to universal) may be illustrated thus.
Suppose it were said, 'The fact that Socrates was wise and just is
a sign that the wise are just'. Here we certainly have a Sign; but
even though the proposition be true, the argument is refutable, since
it does not form a syllogism. Suppose, on the other hand, it were
said, 'The fact that he has a fever is a sign that he is ill', or,
'The fact that she is giving milk is a sign that she has lately borne
a child'. Here we have the infallible kind of Sign, the only kind
that constitutes a complete proof, since it is the only kind that,
if the particular statement is true, is irrefutable. The other kind
of Sign, that which bears to the proposition it supports the relation
of universal to particular, might be illustrated by saying, 'The fact
that he breathes fast is a sign that he has a fever'. This argument
also is refutable, even if the statement about the fast breathing
be true, since a man may breathe hard without having a fever.

It has, then, been stated above what is the nature of a Probability,
of a Sign, and of a complete proof, and what are the differences between
them. In the Analytics a more explicit description has been given
of these points; it is there shown why some of these reasonings can
be put into syllogisms and some cannot. 

The 'example' has already been described as one kind of induction;
and the special nature of the subject-matter that distinguishes it
from the other kinds has also been stated above. Its relation to the
proposition it supports is not that of part to whole, nor whole to
part, nor whole to whole, but of part to part, or like to like. When
two statements are of the same order, but one is more familiar than
the other, the former is an 'example'. The argument may, for instance,
be that Dionysius, in asking as he does for a bodyguard, is scheming
to make himself a despot. For in the past Peisistratus kept asking
for a bodyguard in order to carry out such a scheme, and did make
himself a despot as soon as he got it; and so did Theagenes at Megara;
and in the same way all other instances known to the speaker are made
into examples, in order to show what is not yet known, that Dionysius
has the same purpose in making the same request: all these being instances
of the one general principle, that a man who asks for a bodyguard
is scheming to make himself a despot. We have now described the sources
of those means of persuasion which are popularly supposed to be demonstrative.

There is an important distinction between two sorts of enthymemes
that has been wholly overlooked by almost everybody-one that also
subsists between the syllogisms treated of in dialectic. One sort
of enthymeme really belongs to rhetoric, as one sort of syllogism
really belongs to dialectic; but the other sort really belongs to
other arts and faculties, whether to those we already exercise or
to those we have not yet acquired. Missing this distinction, people
fail to notice that the more correctly they handle their particular
subject the further they are getting away from pure rhetoric or dialectic.
This statement will be clearer if expressed more fully. I mean that
the proper subjects of dialectical and rhetorical syllogisms are the
things with which we say the regular or universal Lines of Argument
are concerned, that is to say those lines of argument that apply equally
to questions of right conduct, natural science, politics, and many
other things that have nothing to do with one another. Take, for instance,
the line of argument concerned with 'the more or less'. On this line
of argument it is equally easy to base a syllogism or enthymeme about
any of what nevertheless are essentially disconnected subjects-right
conduct, natural science, or anything else whatever. But there are
also those special Lines of Argument which are based on such propositions
as apply only to particular groups or classes of things. Thus there
are propositions about natural science on which it is impossible to
base any enthymeme or syllogism about ethics, and other propositions
about ethics on which nothing can be based about natural science.
The same principle applies throughout. The general Lines of Argument
have no special subject-matter, and therefore will not increase our
understanding of any particular class of things. On the other hand,
the better the selection one makes of propositions suitable for special
Lines of Argument, the nearer one comes, unconsciously, to setting
up a science that is distinct from dialectic and rhetoric. One may
succeed in stating the required principles, but one's science will
be no longer dialectic or rhetoric, but the science to which the principles
thus discovered belong. Most enthymemes are in fact based upon these
particular or special Lines of Argument; comparatively few on the
common or general kind. As in the therefore, so in this work, we must
distinguish, in dealing with enthymemes, the special and the general
Lines of Argument on which they are to be founded. By special Lines
of Argument I mean the propositions peculiar to each several class
of things, by general those common to all classes alike. We may begin
with the special Lines of Argument. But, first of all, let us classify
rhetoric into its varieties. Having distinguished these we may deal
with them one by one, and try to discover the elements of which each
is composed, and the propositions each must employ. 

Part 3

Rhetoric falls into three divisions, determined by the three classes
of listeners to speeches. For of the three elements in speech-making--speaker,
subject, and person addressed--it is the last one, the hearer, that
determines the speech's end and object. The hearer must be either
a judge, with a decision to make about things past or future, or an
observer. A member of the assembly decides about future events, a
juryman about past events: while those who merely decide on the orator's
skill are observers. From this it follows that there are three divisions
of oratory-(1) political, (2) forensic, and (3) the ceremonial oratory
of display. 

Political speaking urges us either to do or not to do something: one
of these two courses is always taken by private counsellors, as well
as by men who address public assemblies. Forensic speaking either
attacks or defends somebody: one or other of these two things must
always be done by the parties in a case. The ceremonial oratory of
display either praises or censures somebody. These three kinds of
rhetoric refer to three different kinds of time. The political orator
is concerned with the future: it is about things to be done hereafter
that he advises, for or against. The party in a case at law is concerned
with the past; one man accuses the other, and the other defends himself,
with reference to things already done. The ceremonial orator is, properly
speaking, concerned with the present, since all men praise or blame
in view of the state of things existing at the time, though they often
find it useful also to recall the past and to make guesses at the
future. 

Rhetoric has three distinct ends in view, one for each of its three
kinds. The political orator aims at establishing the expediency or
the harmfulness of a proposed course of action; if he urges its acceptance,
he does so on the ground that it will do good; if he urges its rejection,
he does so on the ground that it will do harm; and all other points,
such as whether the proposal is just or unjust, honourable or dishonourable,
he brings in as subsidiary and relative to this main consideration.
Parties in a law-case aim at establishing the justice or injustice
of some action, and they too bring in all other points as subsidiary
and relative to this one. Those who praise or attack a man aim at
proving him worthy of honour or the reverse, and they too treat all
other considerations with reference to this one. 

That the three kinds of rhetoric do aim respectively at the three
ends we have mentioned is shown by the fact that speakers will sometimes
not try to establish anything else. Thus, the litigant will sometimes
not deny that a thing has happened or that he has done harm. But that
he is guilty of injustice he will never admit; otherwise there would
be no need of a trial. So too, political orators often make any concession
short of admitting that they are recommending their hearers to take
an inexpedient course or not to take an expedient one. The question
whether it is not unjust for a city to enslave its innocent neighbours
often does not trouble them at all. In like manner those who praise
or censure a man do not consider whether his acts have been expedient
or not, but often make it a ground of actual praise that he has neglected
his own interest to do what was honourable. Thus, they praise Achilles
because he championed his fallen friend Patroclus, though he knew
that this meant death, and that otherwise he need not die: yet while
to die thus was the nobler thing for him to do, the expedient thing
was to live on. 

It is evident from what has been said that it is these three subjects,
more than any others, about which the orator must be able to have
propositions at his command. Now the propositions of Rhetoric are
Complete Proofs, Probabilities, and Signs. Every kind of syllogism
is composed of propositions, and the enthymeme is a particular kind
of syllogism composed of the aforesaid propositions. 

Since only possible actions, and not impossible ones, can ever have
been done in the past or the present, and since things which have
not occurred, or will not occur, also cannot have been done or be
going to be done, it is necessary for the political, the forensic,
and the ceremonial speaker alike to be able to have at their command
propositions about the possible and the impossible, and about whether
a thing has or has not occurred, will or will not occur. Further,
all men, in giving praise or blame, in urging us to accept or reject
proposals for action, in accusing others or defending themselves,
attempt not only to prove the points mentioned but also to show that
the good or the harm, the honour or disgrace, the justice or injustice,
is great or small, either absolutely or relatively; and therefore
it is plain that we must also have at our command propositions about
greatness or smallness and the greater or the lesser-propositions
both universal and particular. Thus, we must be able to say which
is the greater or lesser good, the greater or lesser act of justice
or injustice; and so on. 

Such, then, are the subjects regarding which we are inevitably bound
to master the propositions relevant to them. We must now discuss each
particular class of these subjects in turn, namely those dealt with
in political, in ceremonial, and lastly in legal, oratory.

Part 4

First, then, we must ascertain what are the kinds of things, good
or bad, about which the political orator offers counsel. For he does
not deal with all things, but only with such as may or may not take
place. Concerning things which exist or will exist inevitably, or
which cannot possibly exist or take place, no counsel can be given.
Nor, again, can counsel be given about the whole class of things which
may or may not take place; for this class includes some good things
that occur naturally, and some that occur by accident; and about these
it is useless to offer counsel. Clearly counsel can only be given
on matters about which people deliberate; matters, namely, that ultimately
depend on ourselves, and which we have it in our power to set going.
For we turn a thing over in our mind until we have reached the point
of seeing whether we can do it or not. 

Now to enumerate and classify accurately the usual subjects of public
business, and further to frame, as far as possible, true definitions
of them is a task which we must not attempt on the present occasion.
For it does not belong to the art of rhetoric, but to a more instructive
art and a more real branch of knowledge; and as it is, rhetoric has
been given a far wider subject-matter than strictly belongs to it.
The truth is, as indeed we have said already, that rhetoric is a combination
of the science of logic and of the ethical branch of politics; and
it is partly like dialectic, partly like sophistical reasoning. But
the more we try to make either dialectic rhetoric not, what they really
are, practical faculties, but sciences, the more we shall inadvertently
be destroying their true nature; for we shall be re-fashioning them
and shall be passing into the region of sciences dealing with definite
subjects rather than simply with words and forms of reasoning. Even
here, however, we will mention those points which it is of practical
importance to distinguish, their fuller treatment falling naturally
to political science. 

The main matters on which all men deliberate and on which political
speakers make speeches are some five in number: ways and means, war
and peace, national defence, imports and exports, and legislation.

As to Ways and Means, then, the intending speaker will need to know
the number and extent of the country's sources of revenue, so that,
if any is being overlooked, it may be added, and, if any is defective,
it may be increased. Further, he should know all the expenditure of
the country, in order that, if any part of it is superfluous, it may
be abolished, or, if any is too large, it may be reduced. For men
become richer not only by increasing their existing wealth but also
by reducing their expenditure. A comprehensive view of these questions
cannot be gained solely from experience in home affairs; in order
to advise on such matters a man must be keenly interested in the methods
worked out in other lands. 

As to Peace and War, he must know the extent of the military strength
of his country, both actual and potential, and also the mature of
that actual and potential strength; and further, what wars his country
has waged, and how it has waged them. He must know these facts not
only about his own country, but also about neighbouring countries;
and also about countries with which war is likely, in order that peace
may be maintained with those stronger than his own, and that his own
may have power to make war or not against those that are weaker. He
should know, too, whether the military power of another country is
like or unlike that of his own; for this is a matter that may affect
their relative strength. With the same end in view he must, besides,
have studied the wars of other countries as well as those of his own,
and the way they ended; similar causes are likely to have similar
results. 

With regard to National Defence: he ought to know all about the methods
of defence in actual use, such as the strength and character of the
defensive force and the positions of the forts-this last means that
he must be well acquainted with the lie of the country-in order that
a garrison may be increased if it is too small or removed if it is
not wanted, and that the strategic points may be guarded with special
care. 

With regard to the Food Supply: he must know what outlay will meet
the needs of his country; what kinds of food are produced at home
and what imported; and what articles must be exported or imported.
This last he must know in order that agreements and commercial treaties
may be made with the countries concerned. There are, indeed, two sorts
of state to which he must see that his countrymen give no cause for
offence, states stronger than his own, and states with which it is
advantageous to trade. 

But while he must, for security's sake, be able to take all this into
account, he must before all things understand the subject of legislation;
for it is on a country's laws that its whole welfare depends. He must,
therefore, know how many different forms of constitution there are;
under what conditions each of these will prosper and by what internal
developments or external attacks each of them tends to be destroyed.
When I speak of destruction through internal developments I refer
to the fact that all constitutions, except the best one of all, are
destroyed both by not being pushed far enough and by being pushed
too far. Thus, democracy loses its vigour, and finally passes into
oligarchy, not only when it is not pushed far enough, but also when
it is pushed a great deal too far; just as the aquiline and the snub
nose not only turn into normal noses by not being aquiline or snub
enough, but also by being too violently aquiline or snub arrive at
a condition in which they no longer look like noses at all. It is
useful, in framing laws, not only to study the past history of one's
own country, in order to understand which constitution is desirable
for it now, but also to have a knowledge of the constitutions of other
nations, and so to learn for what kinds of nation the various kinds
of constitution are suited. From this we can see that books of travel
are useful aids to legislation, since from these we may learn the
laws and customs of different races. The political speaker will also
find the researches of historians useful. But all this is the business
of political science and not of rhetoric. 

These, then, are the most important kinds of information which the
political speaker must possess. Let us now go back and state the premisses
from which he will have to argue in favour of adopting or rejecting
measures regarding these and other matters. 

Part 5

It may be said that every individual man and all men in common aim
at a certain end which determines what they choose and what they avoid.
This end, to sum it up briefly, is happiness and its constituents.
Let us, then, by way of illustration only, ascertain what is in general
the nature of happiness, and what are the elements of its constituent
parts. For all advice to do things or not to do them is concerned
with happiness and with the things that make for or against it; whatever
creates or increases happiness or some part of happiness, we ought
to do; whatever destroys or hampers happiness, or gives rise to its
opposite, we ought not to do. 

We may define happiness as prosperity combined with virtue; or as
independence of life; or as the secure enjoyment of the maximum of
pleasure; or as a good condition of property and body, together with
the power of guarding one's property and body and making use of them.
That happiness is one or more of these things, pretty well everybody
agrees. 

From this definition of happiness it follows that its constituent
parts are:-good birth, plenty of friends, good friends, wealth, good
children, plenty of children, a happy old age, also such bodily excellences
as health, beauty, strength, large stature, athletic powers, together
with fame, honour, good luck, and virtue. A man cannot fail to be
completely independent if he possesses these internal and these external
goods; for besides these there are no others to have. (Goods of the
soul and of the body are internal. Good birth, friends, money, and
honour are external.) Further, we think that he should possess resources
and luck, in order to make his life really secure. As we have already
ascertained what happiness in general is, so now let us try to ascertain
what of these parts of it is. 

Now good birth in a race or a state means that its members are indigenous
or ancient: that its earliest leaders were distinguished men, and
that from them have sprung many who were distinguished for qualities
that we admire. 

The good birth of an individual, which may come either from the male
or the female side, implies that both parents are free citizens, and
that, as in the case of the state, the founders of the line have been
notable for virtue or wealth or something else which is highly prized,
and that many distinguished persons belong to the family, men and
women, young and old. 

The phrases 'possession of good children' and 'of many children' bear
a quite clear meaning. Applied to a community, they mean that its
young men are numerous and of good a quality: good in regard to bodily
excellences, such as stature, beauty, strength, athletic powers; and
also in regard to the excellences of the soul, which in a young man
are temperance and courage. Applied to an individual, they mean that
his own children are numerous and have the good qualities we have
described. Both male and female are here included; the excellences
of the latter are, in body, beauty and stature; in soul, self-command
and an industry that is not sordid. Communities as well as individuals
should lack none of these perfections, in their women as well as in
their men. Where, as among the Lacedaemonians, the state of women
is bad, almost half of human life is spoilt. 

The constituents of wealth are: plenty of coined money and territory;
the ownership of numerous, large, and beautiful estates; also the
ownership of numerous and beautiful implements, live stock, and slaves.
All these kinds of property are our own, are secure, gentlemanly,
and useful. The useful kinds are those that are productive, the gentlemanly
kinds are those that provide enjoyment. By 'productive' I mean those
from which we get our income; by 'enjoyable', those from which we
get nothing worth mentioning except the use of them. The criterion
of 'security' is the ownership of property in such places and under
such Conditions that the use of it is in our power; and it is 'our
own' if it is in our own power to dispose of it or keep it. By 'disposing
of it' I mean giving it away or selling it. Wealth as a whole consists
in using things rather than in owning them; it is really the activity-that
is, the use-of property that constitutes wealth. 

Fame means being respected by everybody, or having some quality that
is desired by all men, or by most, or by the good, or by the wise.

Honour is the token of a man's being famous for doing good. it is
chiefly and most properly paid to those who have already done good;
but also to the man who can do good in future. Doing good refers either
to the preservation of life and the means of life, or to wealth, or
to some other of the good things which it is hard to get either always
or at that particular place or time-for many gain honour for things
which seem small, but the place and the occasion account for it. The
constituents of honour are: sacrifices; commemoration, in verse or
prose; privileges; grants of land; front seats at civic celebrations;
state burial; statues; public maintenance; among foreigners, obeisances
and giving place; and such presents as are among various bodies of
men regarded as marks of honour. For a present is not only the bestowal
of a piece of property, but also a token of honour; which explains
why honour-loving as well as money-loving persons desire it. The present
brings to both what they want; it is a piece of property, which is
what the lovers of money desire; and it brings honour, which is what
the lovers of honour desire. 

The excellence of the body is health; that is, a condition which allows
us, while keeping free from disease, to have the use of our bodies;
for many people are 'healthy' as we are told Herodicus was; and these
no one can congratulate on their 'health', for they have to abstain
from everything or nearly everything that men do.-Beauty varies with
the time of life. In a young man beauty is the possession of a body
fit to endure the exertion of running and of contests of strength;
which means that he is pleasant to look at; and therefore all-round
athletes are the most beautiful, being naturally adapted both for
contests of strength and for speed also. For a man in his prime, beauty
is fitness for the exertion of warfare, together with a pleasant but
at the same time formidable appearance. For an old man, it is to be
strong enough for such exertion as is necessary, and to be free from
all those deformities of old age which cause pain to others. Strength
is the power of moving some one else at will; to do this, you must
either pull, push, lift, pin, or grip him; thus you must be strong
in all of those ways or at least in some. Excellence in size is to
surpass ordinary people in height, thickness, and breadth by just
as much as will not make one's movements slower in consequence. Athletic
excellence of the body consists in size, strength, and swiftness;
swiftness implying strength. He who can fling forward his legs in
a certain way, and move them fast and far, is good at running; he
who can grip and hold down is good at wrestling; he who can drive
an adversary from his ground with the right blow is a good boxer:
he who can do both the last is a good pancratiast, while he who can
do all is an 'all-round' athlete. 

Happiness in old age is the coming of old age slowly and painlessly;
for a man has not this happiness if he grows old either quickly, or
tardily but painfully. It arises both from the excellences of the
body and from good luck. If a man is not free from disease, or if
he is strong, he will not be free from suffering; nor can he continue
to live a long and painless life unless he has good luck. There is,
indeed, a capacity for long life that is quite independent of health
or strength; for many people live long who lack the excellences of
the body; but for our present purpose there is no use in going into
the details of this. 

The terms 'possession of many friends' and 'possession of good friends'
need no explanation; for we define a 'friend' as one who will always
try, for your sake, to do what he takes to be good for you. The man
towards whom many feel thus has many friends; if these are worthy
men, he has good friends. 

'Good luck' means the acquisition or possession of all or most, or
the most important, of those good things which are due to luck. Some
of the things that are due to luck may also be due to artificial contrivance;
but many are independent of art, as for example those which are due
to nature-though, to be sure, things due to luck may actually be contrary
to nature. Thus health may be due to artificial contrivance, but beauty
and stature are due to nature. All such good things as excite envy
are, as a class, the outcome of good luck. Luck is also the cause
of good things that happen contrary to reasonable expectation: as
when, for instance, all your brothers are ugly, but you are handsome
yourself; or when you find a treasure that everybody else has overlooked;
or when a missile hits the next man and misses you; or when you are
the only man not to go to a place you have gone to regularly, while
the others go there for the first time and are killed. All such things
are reckoned pieces of good luck. 

As to virtue, it is most closely connected with the subject of Eulogy,
and therefore we will wait to define it until we come to discuss that
subject. 

Part 6

It is now plain what our aims, future or actual, should be in urging,
and what in depreciating, a proposal; the latter being the opposite
of the former. Now the political or deliberative orator's aim is utility:
deliberation seeks to determine not ends but the means to ends, i.e.
what it is most useful to do. Further, utility is a good thing. We
ought therefore to assure ourselves of the main facts about Goodness
and Utility in general. 

We may define a good thing as that which ought to be chosen for its
own sake; or as that for the sake of which we choose something else;
or as that which is sought after by all things, or by all things that
have sensation or reason, or which will be sought after by any things
that acquire reason; or as that which must be prescribed for a given
individual by reason generally, or is prescribed for him by his individual
reason, this being his individual good; or as that whose presence
brings anything into a satisfactory and self-sufficing condition;
or as self-sufficiency; or as what produces, maintains, or entails
characteristics of this kind, while preventing and destroying their
opposites. One thing may entail another in either of two ways-(1)
simultaneously, (2) subsequently. Thus learning entails knowledge
subsequently, health entails life simultaneously. Things are productive
of other things in three senses: first as being healthy produces health;
secondly, as food produces health; and thirdly, as exercise does-i.e.
it does so usually. All this being settled, we now see that both the
acquisition of good things and the removal of bad things must be good;
the latter entails freedom from the evil things simultaneously, while
the former entails possession of the good things subsequently. The
acquisition of a greater in place of a lesser good, or of a lesser
in place of a greater evil, is also good, for in proportion as the
greater exceeds the lesser there is acquisition of good or removal
of evil. The virtues, too, must be something good; for it is by possessing
these that we are in a good condition, and they tend to produce good
works and good actions. They must be severally named and described
elsewhere. Pleasure, again, must be a good thing, since it is the
nature of all animals to aim at it. Consequently both pleasant and
beautiful things must be good things, since the former are productive
of pleasure, while of the beautiful things some are pleasant and some
desirable in and for themselves. 

The following is a more detailed list of things that must be good.
Happiness, as being desirable in itself and sufficient by itself,
and as being that for whose sake we choose many other things. Also
justice, courage, temperance, magnanimity, magnificence, and all such
qualities, as being excellences of the soul. Further, health, beauty,
and the like, as being bodily excellences and productive of many other
good things: for instance, health is productive both of pleasure and
of life, and therefore is thought the greatest of goods, since these
two things which it causes, pleasure and life, are two of the things
most highly prized by ordinary people. Wealth, again: for it is the
excellence of possession, and also productive of many other good things.
Friends and friendship: for a friend is desirable in himself and also
productive of many other good things. So, too, honour and reputation,
as being pleasant, and productive of many other good things, and usually
accompanied by the presence of the good things that cause them to
be bestowed. The faculty of speech and action; since all such qualities
are productive of what is good. Further-good parts, strong memory,
receptiveness, quickness of intuition, and the like, for all such
faculties are productive of what is good. Similarly, all the sciences
and arts. And life: since, even if no other good were the result of
life, it is desirable in itself. And justice, as the cause of good
to the community. 

The above are pretty well all the things admittedly good. In dealing
with things whose goodness is disputed, we may argue in the following
ways:-That is good of which the contrary is bad. That is good the
contrary of which is to the advantage of our enemies; for example,
if it is to the particular advantage of our enemies that we should
be cowards, clearly courage is of particular value to our countrymen.
And generally, the contrary of that which our enemies desire, or of
that at which they rejoice, is evidently valuable. Hence the passage
beginning: 

"Surely would Priam exult. "

This principle usually holds good, but not always, since it may well
be that our interest is sometimes the same as that of our enemies.
Hence it is said that 'evils draw men together'; that is, when the
same thing is hurtful to them both. 

Further: that which is not in excess is good, and that which is greater
than it should be is bad. That also is good on which much labour or
money has been spent; the mere fact of this makes it seem good, and
such a good is assumed to be an end-an end reached through a long
chain of means; and any end is a good. Hence the lines beginning:

"And for Priam (and Troy-town's folk) should 

"they leave behind them a boast; "

and 

"Oh, it were shame 

"To have tarried so long and return empty-handed 

"as erst we came; "

and there is also the proverb about 'breaking the pitcher at the
door'. 

That which most people seek after, and which is obviously an object
of contention, is also a good; for, as has been shown, that is good
which is sought after by everybody, and 'most people' is taken to
be equivalent to 'everybody'. That which is praised is good, since
no one praises what is not good. So, again, that which is praised
by our enemies [or by the worthless] for when even those who have
a grievance think a thing good, it is at once felt that every one
must agree with them; our enemies can admit the fact only because
it is evident, just as those must be worthless whom their friends
censure and their enemies do not. (For this reason the Corinthians
conceived themselves to be insulted by Simonides when he wrote:

"Against the Corinthians hath Ilium no complaint.) "

Again, that is good which has been distinguished by the favour of
a discerning or virtuous man or woman, as Odysseus was distinguished
by Athena, Helen by Theseus, Paris by the goddesses, and Achilles
by Homer. And, generally speaking, all things are good which men deliberately
choose to do; this will include the things already mentioned, and
also whatever may be bad for their enemies or good for their friends,
and at the same time practicable. Things are 'practicable' in two
senses: (1) it is possible to do them, (2) it is easy to do them.
Things are done 'easily' when they are done either without pain or
quickly: the 'difficulty' of an act lies either in its painfulness
or in the long time it takes. Again, a thing is good if it is as men
wish; and they wish to have either no evil at an or at least a balance
of good over evil. This last will happen where the penalty is either
imperceptible or slight. Good, too, are things that are a man's very
own, possessed by no one else, exceptional; for this increases the
credit of having them. So are things which befit the possessors, such
as whatever is appropriate to their birth or capacity, and whatever
they feel they ought to have but lack-such things may indeed be trifling,
but none the less men deliberately make them the goal of their action.
And things easily effected; for these are practicable (in the sense
of being easy); such things are those in which every one, or most
people, or one's equals, or one's inferiors have succeeded. Good also
are the things by which we shall gratify our friends or annoy our
enemies; and the things chosen by those whom we admire: and the things
for which we are fitted by nature or experience, since we think we
shall succeed more easily in these: and those in which no worthless
man can succeed, for such things bring greater praise: and those which
we do in fact desire, for what we desire is taken to be not only pleasant
but also better. Further, a man of a given disposition makes chiefly
for the corresponding things: lovers of victory make for victory,
lovers of honour for honour, money-loving men for money, and so with
the rest. These, then, are the sources from which we must derive our
means of persuasion about Good and Utility. 

Part 7

Since, however, it often happens that people agree that two things
are both useful but do not agree about which is the more so, the next
step will be to treat of relative goodness and relative utility.

A thing which surpasses another may be regarded as being that other
thing plus something more, and that other thing which is surpassed
as being what is contained in the first thing. Now to call a thing
'greater' or 'more' always implies a comparison of it with one that
is 'smaller' or 'less', while 'great' and 'small', 'much' and 'little',
are terms used in comparison with normal magnitude. The 'great' is
that which surpasses the normal, the 'small' is that which is surpassed
by the normal; and so with 'many' and 'few'. 

Now we are applying the term 'good' to what is desirable for its own
sake and not for the sake of something else; to that at which all
things aim; to what they would choose if they could acquire understanding
and practical wisdom; and to that which tends to produce or preserve
such goods, or is always accompanied by them. Moreover, that for the
sake of which things are done is the end (an end being that for the
sake of which all else is done), and for each individual that thing
is a good which fulfils these conditions in regard to himself. It
follows, then, that a greater number of goods is a greater good than
one or than a smaller number, if that one or that smaller number is
included in the count; for then the larger number surpasses the smaller,
and the smaller quantity is surpassed as being contained in the larger.

Again, if the largest member of one class surpasses the largest member
of another, then the one class surpasses the other; and if one class
surpasses another, then the largest member of the one surpasses the
largest member of the other. Thus, if the tallest man is taller than
the tallest woman, then men in general are taller than women. Conversely,
if men in general are taller than women, then the tallest man is taller
than the tallest woman. For the superiority of class over class is
proportionate to the superiority possessed by their largest specimens.
Again, where one good is always accompanied by another, but does not
always accompany it, it is greater than the other, for the use of
the second thing is implied in the use of the first. A thing may be
accompanied by another in three ways, either simultaneously, subsequently,
or potentially. Life accompanies health simultaneously (but not health
life), knowledge accompanies the act of learning subsequently, cheating
accompanies sacrilege potentially, since a man who has committed sacrilege
is always capable of cheating. Again, when two things each surpass
a third, that which does so by the greater amount is the greater of
the two; for it must surpass the greater as well as the less of the
other two. A thing productive of a greater good than another is productive
of is itself a greater good than that other. For this conception of
'productive of a greater' has been implied in our argument. Likewise,
that which is produced by a greater good is itself a greater good;
thus, if what is wholesome is more desirable and a greater good than
what gives pleasure, health too must be a greater good than pleasure.
Again, a thing which is desirable in itself is a greater good than
a thing which is not desirable in itself, as for example bodily strength
than what is wholesome, since the latter is not pursued for its own
sake, whereas the former is; and this was our definition of the good.
Again, if one of two things is an end, and the other is not, the former
is the greater good, as being chosen for its own sake and not for
the sake of something else; as, for example, exercise is chosen for
the sake of physical well-being. And of two things that which stands
less in need of the other, or of other things, is the greater good,
since it is more self-sufficing. (That which stands 'less' in need
of others is that which needs either fewer or easier things.) So when
one thing does not exist or cannot come into existence without a second,
while the second can exist without the first, the second is the better.
That which does not need something else is more self-sufficing than
that which does, and presents itself as a greater good for that reason.
Again, that which is a beginning of other things is a greater good
than that which is not, and that which is a cause is a greater good
than that which is not; the reason being the same in each case, namely
that without a cause and a beginning nothing can exist or come into
existence. Again, where there are two sets of consequences arising
from two different beginnings or causes, the consequences of the more
important beginning or cause are themselves the more important; and
conversely, that beginning or cause is itself the more important which
has the more important consequences. Now it is plain, from all that
has been said, that one thing may be shown to be more important than
another from two opposite points of view: it may appear the more important
(1) because it is a beginning and the other thing is not, and also
(2) because it is not a beginning and the other thing is-on the ground
that the end is more important and is not a beginning. So Leodamas,
when accusing Callistratus, said that the man who prompted the deed
was more guilty than the doer, since it would not have been done if
he had not planned it. On the other hand, when accusing Chabrias he
said that the doer was worse than the prompter, since there would
have been no deed without some one to do it; men, said he, plot a
thing only in order to carry it out. 

Further, what is rare is a greater good than what is plentiful. Thus,
gold is a better thing than iron, though less useful: it is harder
to get, and therefore better worth getting. Reversely, it may be argued
that the plentiful is a better thing than the rare, because we can
make more use of it. For what is often useful surpasses what is seldom
useful, whence the saying: 

"The best of things is water. "

More generally: the hard thing is better than the easy, because it
is rarer: and reversely, the easy thing is better than the hard, for
it is as we wish it to be. That is the greater good whose contrary
is the greater evil, and whose loss affects us more. Positive goodness
and badness are more important than the mere absence of goodness and
badness: for positive goodness and badness are ends, which the mere
absence of them cannot be. Further, in proportion as the functions
of things are noble or base, the things themselves are good or bad:
conversely, in proportion as the things themselves are good or bad,
their functions also are good or bad; for the nature of results corresponds
with that of their causes and beginnings, and conversely the nature
of causes and beginnings corresponds with that of their results. Moreover,
those things are greater goods, superiority in which is more desirable
or more honourable. Thus, keenness of sight is more desirable than
keenness of smell, sight generally being more desirable than smell
generally; and similarly, unusually great love of friends being more
honourable than unusually great love of money, ordinary love of friends
is more honourable than ordinary love of money. Conversely, if one
of two normal things is better or nobler than the other, an unusual
degree of that thing is better or nobler than an unusual degree of
the other. Again, one thing is more honourable or better than another
if it is more honourable or better to desire it; the importance of
the object of a given instinct corresponds to the importance of the
instinct itself; and for the same reason, if one thing is more honourable
or better than another, it is more honourable and better to desire
it. Again, if one science is more honourable and valuable than another,
the activity with which it deals is also more honourable and valuable;
as is the science, so is the reality that is its object, each science
being authoritative in its own sphere. So, also, the more valuable
and honourable the object of a science, the more valuable and honourable
the science itself is-in consequence. Again, that which would be judged,
or which has been judged, a good thing, or a better thing than something
else, by all or most people of understanding, or by the majority of
men, or by the ablest, must be so; either without qualification, or
in so far as they use their understanding to form their judgement.
This is indeed a general principle, applicable to all other judgements
also; not only the goodness of things, but their essence, magnitude,
and general nature are in fact just what knowledge and understanding
will declare them to be. Here the principle is applied to judgements
of goodness, since one definition of 'good' was 'what beings that
acquire understanding will choose in any given case': from which it
clearly follows that that thing is hetter which understanding declares
to be so. That, again, is a better thing which attaches to better
men, either absolutely, or in virtue of their being better; as courage
is better than strength. And that is a greater good which would be
chosen by a better man, either absolutely, or in virtue of his being
better: for instance, to suffer wrong rather than to do wrong, for
that would be the choice of the juster man. Again, the pleasanter
of two things is the better, since all things pursue pleasure, and
things instinctively desire pleasurable sensation for its own sake;
and these are two of the characteristics by which the 'good' and the
'end' have been defined. One pleasure is greater than another if it
is more unmixed with pain, or more lasting. Again, the nobler thing
is better than the less noble, since the noble is either what is pleasant
or what is desirable in itself. And those things also are greater
goods which men desire more earnestly to bring about for themselves
or for their friends, whereas those things which they least desire
to bring about are greater evils. And those things which are more
lasting are better than those which are more fleeting, and the more
secure than the less; the enjoyment of the lasting has the advantage
of being longer, and that of the secure has the advantage of suiting
our wishes, being there for us whenever we like. Further, in accordance
with the rule of co-ordinate terms and inflexions of the same stem,
what is true of one such related word is true of all. Thus if the
action qualified by the term 'brave' is more noble and desirable than
the action qualified by the term 'temperate', then 'bravery' is more
desirable than 'temperance' and 'being brave' than 'being temperate'.
That, again, which is chosen by all is a greater good than that which
is not, and that chosen by the majority than that chosen by the minority.
For that which all desire is good, as we have said;' and so, the more
a thing is desired, the better it is. Further, that is the better
thing which is considered so by competitors or enemies, or, again,
by authorized judges or those whom they select to represent them.
In the first two cases the decision is virtually that of every one,
in the last two that of authorities and experts. And sometimes it
may be argued that what all share is the better thing, since it is
a dishonour not to share in it; at other times, that what none or
few share is better, since it is rarer. The more praiseworthy things
are, the nobler and therefore the better they are. So with the things
that earn greater honours than others-honour is, as it were, a measure
of value; and the things whose absence involves comparatively heavy
penalties; and the things that are better than others admitted or
believed to be good. Moreover, things look better merely by being
divided into their parts, since they then seem to surpass a greater
number of things than before. Hence Homer says that Meleager was roused
to battle by the thought of 

"All horrors that light on a folk whose city 

"is ta'en of their foes, 

"When they slaughter the men, when the burg is 

"wasted with ravening flame, 

"When strangers are haling young children to thraldom, 

"(fair women to shame.) "

The same effect is produced by piling up facts in a climax after the
manner of Epicharmus. The reason is partly the same as in the case
of division (for combination too makes the impression of great superiority),
and partly that the original thing appears to be the cause and origin
of important results. And since a thing is better when it is harder
or rarer than other things, its superiority may be due to seasons,
ages, places, times, or one's natural powers. When a man accomplishes
something beyond his natural power, or beyond his years, or beyond
the measure of people like him, or in a special way, or at a special
place or time, his deed will have a high degree of nobleness, goodness,
and justice, or of their opposites. Hence the epigram on the victor
at the Olympic games: 

"In time past, hearing a Yoke on my shoulders, 

"of wood unshaven, 

"I carried my loads of fish from, Argos to Tegea town. "

So Iphicrates used to extol himself by describing the low estate from
which he had risen. Again, what is natural is better than what is
acquired, since it is harder to come by. Hence the words of Homer:

"I have learnt from none but mysell. "

And the best part of a good thing is particularly good; as when Pericles
in his funeral oration said that the country's loss of its young men
in battle was 'as if the spring were taken out of the year'. So with
those things which are of service when the need is pressing; for example,
in old age and times of sickness. And of two things that which leads
more directly to the end in view is the better. So too is that which
is better for people generally as well as for a particular individual.
Again, what can be got is better than what cannot, for it is good
in a given case and the other thing is not. And what is at the end
of life is better than what is not, since those things are ends in
a greater degree which are nearer the end. What aims at reality is
better than what aims at appearance. We may define what aims at appearance
as what a man will not choose if nobody is to know of his having it.
This would seem to show that to receive benefits is more desirable
than to confer them, since a man will choose the former even if nobody
is to know of it, but it is not the general view that he will choose
the latter if nobody knows of it. What a man wants to be is better
than what a man wants to seem, for in aiming at that he is aiming
more at reality. Hence men say that justice is of small value, since
it is more desirable to seem just than to be just, whereas with health
it is not so. That is better than other things which is more useful
than they are for a number of different purposes; for example, that
which promotes life, good life, pleasure, and noble conduct. For this
reason wealth and health are commonly thought to be of the highest
value, as possessing all these advantages. Again, that is better than
other things which is accompanied both with less pain and with actual
pleasure; for here there is more than one advantage; and so here we
have the good of feeling pleasure and also the good of not feeling
pain. And of two good things that is the better whose addition to
a third thing makes a better whole than the addition of the other
to the same thing will make. Again, those things which we are seen
to possess are better than those which we are not seen to possess,
since the former have the air of reality. Hence wealth may be regarded
as a greater good if its existence is known to others. That which
is dearly prized is better than what is not-the sort of thing that
some people have only one of, though others have more like it. Accordingly,
blinding a one-eyed man inflicts worse injury than half-blinding a
man with two eyes; for the one-eyed man has been robbed of what he
dearly prized. 

The grounds on which we must base our arguments, when we are speaking
for or against a proposal, have now been set forth more or less completely.

Part 8

The most important and effective qualification for success in persuading
audiences and speaking well on public affairs is to understand all
the forms of government and to discriminate their respective customs,
institutions, and interests. For all men are persuaded by considerations
of their interest, and their interest lies in the maintenance of the
established order. Further, it rests with the supreme authority to
give authoritative decisions, and this varies with each form of government;
there are as many different supreme authorities as there are different
forms of government. The forms of government are four-democracy, oligarchy,
aristocracy, monarchy. The supreme right to judge and decide always
rests, therefore, with either a part or the whole of one or other
of these governing powers. 

A Democracy is a form of government under which the citizens distribute
the offices of state among themselves by lot, whereas under oligarchy
there is a property qualification, under aristocracy one of education.
By education I mean that education which is laid down by the law;
for it is those who have been loyal to the national institutions that
hold office under an aristocracy. These are bound to be looked upon
as 'the best men', and it is from this fact that this form of government
has derived its name ('the rule of the best'). Monarchy, as the word
implies, is the constitution a in which one man has authority over
all. There are two forms of monarchy: kingship, which is limited by
prescribed conditions, and 'tyranny', which is not limited by anything.

We must also notice the ends which the various forms of government
pursue, since people choose in practice such actions as will lead
to the realization of their ends. The end of democracy is freedom;
of oligarchy, wealth; of aristocracy, the maintenance of education
and national institutions; of tyranny, the protection of the tyrant.
It is clear, then, that we must distinguish those particular customs,
institutions, and interests which tend to realize the ideal of each
constitution, since men choose their means with reference to their
ends. But rhetorical persuasion is effected not only by demonstrative
but by ethical argument; it helps a speaker to convince us, if we
believe that he has certain qualities himself, namely, goodness, or
goodwill towards us, or both together. Similarly, we should know the
moral qualities characteristic of each form of government, for the
special moral character of each is bound to provide us with our most
effective means of persuasion in dealing with it. We shall learn the
qualities of governments in the same way as we learn the qualities
of individuals, since they are revealed in their deliberate acts of
choice; and these are determined by the end that inspires them.

We have now considered the objects, immediate or distant, at which
we are to aim when urging any proposal, and the grounds on which we
are to base our arguments in favour of its utility. We have also briefly
considered the means and methods by which we shall gain a good knowledge
of the moral qualities and institutions peculiar to the various forms
of government-only, however, to the extent demanded by the present
occasion; a detailed account of the subject has been given in the
Politics. 

Part 9

We have now to consider Virtue and Vice, the Noble and the Base, since
these are the objects of praise and blame. In doing so, we shall at
the same time be finding out how to make our hearers take the required
view of our own characters-our second method of persuasion. The ways
in which to make them trust the goodness of other people are also
the ways in which to make them trust our own. Praise, again, may be
serious or frivolous; nor is it always of a human or divine being
but often of inanimate things, or of the humblest of the lower animals.
Here too we must know on what grounds to argue, and must, therefore,
now discuss the subject, though by way of illustration only.

The Noble is that which is both desirable for its own sake and also
worthy of praise; or that which is both good and also pleasant because
good. If this is a true definition of the Noble, it follows that virtue
must be noble, since it is both a good thing and also praiseworthy.
Virtue is, according to the usual view, a faculty of providing and
preserving good things; or a faculty of conferring many great benefits,
and benefits of all kinds on all occasions. The forms of Virtue are
justice, courage, temperance, magnificence, magnanimity, liberality,
gentleness, prudence, wisdom. If virtue is a faculty of beneficence,
the highest kinds of it must be those which are most useful to others,
and for this reason men honour most the just and the courageous, since
courage is useful to others in war, justice both in war and in peace.
Next comes liberality; liberal people let their money go instead of
fighting for it, whereas other people care more for money than for
anything else. Justice is the virtue through which everybody enjoys
his own possessions in accordance with the law; its opposite is injustice,
through which men enjoy the possessions of others in defiance of the
law. Courage is the virtue that disposes men to do noble deeds in
situations of danger, in accordance with the law and in obedience
to its commands; cowardice is the opposite. Temperance is the virtue
that disposes us to obey the law where physical pleasures are concerned;
incontinence is the opposite. Liberality disposes us to spend money
for others' good; illiberality is the opposite. Magnanimity is the
virtue that disposes us to do good to others on a large scale; [its
opposite is meanness of spirit]. Magnificence is a virtue productive
of greatness in matters involving the spending of money. The opposites
of these two are smallness of spirit and meanness respectively. Prudence
is that virtue of the understanding which enables men to come to wise
decisions about the relation to happiness of the goods and evils that
have been previously mentioned. 

The above is a sufficient account, for our present purpose, of virtue
and vice in general, and of their various forms. As to further aspects
of the subject, it is not difficult to discern the facts; it is evident
that things productive of virtue are noble, as tending towards virtue;
and also the effects of virtue, that is, the signs of its presence
and the acts to which it leads. And since the signs of virtue, and
such acts as it is the mark of a virtuous man to do or have done to
him, are noble, it follows that all deeds or signs of courage, and
everything done courageously, must be noble things; and so with what
is just and actions done justly. (Not, however, actions justly done
to us; here justice is unlike the other virtues; 'justly' does not
always mean 'nobly'; when a man is punished, it is more shameful that
this should be justly than unjustly done to him). The same is true
of the other virtues. Again, those actions are noble for which the
reward is simply honour, or honour more than money. So are those in
which a man aims at something desirable for some one else's sake;
actions good absolutely, such as those a man does for his country
without thinking of himself; actions good in their own nature; actions
that are not good simply for the individual, since individual interests
are selfish. Noble also are those actions whose advantage may be enjoyed
after death, as opposed to those whose advantage is enjoyed during
one's lifetime: for the latter are more likely to be for one's own
sake only. Also, all actions done for the sake of others, since less
than other actions are done for one's own sake; and all successes
which benefit others and not oneself; and services done to one's benefactors,
for this is just; and good deeds generally, since they are not directed
to one's own profit. And the opposites of those things of which men
feel ashamed, for men are ashamed of saying, doing, or intending to
do shameful things. So when Alcacus said 

"Something I fain would say to thee, 

"Only shame restraineth me, "

Sappho wrote 

"If for things good and noble thou wert yearning, 

"If to speak baseness were thy tongue not burning, 

"No load of shame would on thine eyelids weigh; 

"What thou with honour wishest thou wouldst say. "

Those things, also, are noble for which men strive anxiously, without
feeling fear; for they feel thus about the good things which lead
to fair fame. Again, one quality or action is nobler than another
if it is that of a naturally finer being: thus a man's will be nobler
than a woman's. And those qualities are noble which give more pleasure
to other people than to their possessors; hence the nobleness of justice
and just actions. It is noble to avenge oneself on one's enemies and
not to come to terms with them; for requital is just, and the just
is noble; and not to surrender is a sign of courage. Victory, too,
and honour belong to the class of noble things, since they are desirable
even when they yield no fruits, and they prove our superiority in
good qualities. Things that deserve to be remembered are noble, and
the more they deserve this, the nobler they are. So are the things
that continue even after death; those which are always attended by
honour; those which are exceptional; and those which are possessed
by one person alone-these last are more readily remembered than others.
So again are possessions that bring no profit, since they are more
fitting than others for a gentleman. So are the distinctive qualities
of a particular people, and the symbols of what it specially admires,
like long hair in Sparta, where this is a mark of a free man, as it
is not easy to perform any menial task when one's hair is long. Again,
it is noble not to practise any sordid craft, since it is the mark
of a free man not to live at another's beck and call. We are also
to assume when we wish either to praise a man or blame him that qualities
closely allied to those which he actually has are identical with them;
for instance, that the cautious man is cold-blooded and treacherous,
and that the stupid man is an honest fellow or the thick-skinned man
a good-tempered one. We can always idealize any given man by drawing
on the virtues akin to his actual qualities; thus we may say that
the passionate and excitable man is 'outspoken'; or that the arrogant
man is 'superb' or 'impressive'. Those who run to extremes will be
said to possess the corresponding good qualities; rashness will be
called courage, and extravagance generosity. That will be what most
people think; and at the same time this method enables an advocate
to draw a misleading inference from the motive, arguing that if a
man runs into danger needlessly, much more will he do so in a noble
cause; and if a man is open-handed to any one and every one, he will
be so to his friends also, since it is the extreme form of goodness
to be good to everybody. 

We must also take into account the nature of our particular audience
when making a speech of praise; for, as Socrates used to say, 'it
is not difficult to praise the Athenians to an Athenian audience.'
If the audience esteems a given quality, we must say that our hero
has that quality, no matter whether we are addressing Scythians or
Spartans or philosophers. Everything, in fact, that is esteemed we
are to represent as noble. After all, people regard the two things
as much the same. 

All actions are noble that are appropriate to the man who does them:
if, for instance, they are worthy of his ancestors or of his own past
career. For it makes for happiness, and is a noble thing, that he
should add to the honour he already has. Even inappropriate actions
are noble if they are better and nobler than the appropriate ones
would be; for instance, if one who was just an average person when
all went well becomes a hero in adversity, or if he becomes better
and easier to get on with the higher he rises. Compare the saying
of lphicrates, 'Think what I was and what I am'; and the epigram on
the victor at the Olympic games, 

"In time past, bearing a yoke on my shoulders, 

"of wood unshaven, "

and the encomium of Simonides, 

"A woman whose father, whose husband, whose 

"brethren were princes all. "

Since we praise a man for what he has actually done, and fine actions
are distinguished from others by being intentionally good, we must
try to prove that our hero's noble acts are intentional. This is all
the easier if we can make out that he has often acted so before, and
therefore we must assert coincidences and accidents to have been intended.
Produce a number of good actions, all of the same kind, and people
will think that they must have been intended, and that they prove
the good qualities of the man who did them. 

Praise is the expression in words of the eminence of a man's good
qualities, and therefore we must display his actions as the product
of such qualities. Encomium refers to what he has actually done; the
mention of accessories, such as good birth and education, merely helps
to make our story credible-good fathers are likely to have good sons,
and good training is likely to produce good character. Hence it is
only when a man has already done something that we bestow encomiums
upon him. Yet the actual deeds are evidence of the doer's character:
even if a man has not actually done a given good thing, we shall bestow
praise on him, if we are sure that he is the sort of man who would
do it. To call any one blest is, it may be added, the same thing as
to call him happy; but these are not the same thing as to bestow praise
and encomium upon him; the two latter are a part of 'calling happy',
just as goodness is a part of happiness. 

To praise a man is in one respect akin to urging a course of action.
The suggestions which would be made in the latter case become encomiums
when differently expressed. When we know what action or character
is required, then, in order to express these facts as suggestions
for action, we have to change and reverse our form of words. Thus
the statement 'A man should be proud not of what he owes to fortune
but of what he owes to himself', if put like this, amounts to a suggestion;
to make it into praise we must put it thus, 'Since he is proud not
of what he owes to fortune but of what he owes to himself.' Consequently,
whenever you want to praise any one, think what you would urge people
to do; and when you want to urge the doing of anything, think what
you would praise a man for having done. Since suggestion may or may
not forbid an action, the praise into which we convert it must have
one or other of two opposite forms of expression accordingly.

There are, also, many useful ways of heightening the effect of praise.
We must, for instance, point out that a man is the only one, or the
first, or almost the only one who has done something, or that he has
done it better than any one else; all these distinctions are honourable.
And we must, further, make much of the particular season and occasion
of an action, arguing that we could hardly have looked for it just
then. If a man has often achieved the same success, we must mention
this; that is a strong point; he himself, and not luck, will then
be given the credit. So, too, if it is on his account that observances
have been devised and instituted to encourage or honour such achievements
as his own: thus we may praise Hippolochus because the first encomium
ever made was for him, or Harmodius and Aristogeiton because their
statues were the first to be put up in the market-place. And we may
censure bad men for the opposite reason. 

Again, if you cannot find enough to say of a man himself, you may
pit him against others, which is what Isocrates used to do owing to
his want of familiarity with forensic pleading. The comparison should
be with famous men; that will strengthen your case; it is a noble
thing to surpass men who are themselves great. It is only natural
that methods of 'heightening the effect' should be attached particularly
to speeches of praise; they aim at proving superiority over others,
and any such superiority is a form of nobleness. Hence if you cannot
compare your hero with famous men, you should at least compare him
with other people generally, since any superiority is held to reveal
excellence. And, in general, of the lines of argument which are common
to all speeches, this 'heightening of effect' is most suitable for
declamations, where we take our hero's actions as admitted facts,
and our business is simply to invest these with dignity and nobility.
'Examples' are most suitable to deliberative speeches; for we judge
of future events by divination from past events. Enthymemes are most
suitable to forensic speeches; it is our doubts about past events
that most admit of arguments showing why a thing must have happened
or proving that it did happen. 

The above are the general lines on which all, or nearly all, speeches
of praise or blame are constructed. We have seen the sort of thing
we must bear in mind in making such speeches, and the materials out
of which encomiums and censures are made. No special treatment of
censure and vituperation is needed. Knowing the above facts, we know
their contraries; and it is out of these that speeches of censure
are made. 

Part 10

We have next to treat of Accusation and Defence, and to enumerate
and describe the ingredients of the syllogisms used therein. There
are three things we must ascertain first, the nature and number of
the incentives to wrong-doing; second, the state of mind of wrongdoers;
third, the kind of persons who are wronged, and their condition. We
will deal with these questions in order. But before that let us define
the act of 'wrong-doing'. 

We may describe 'wrong-doing' as injury voluntarily inflicted contrary
to law. 'Law' is either special or general. By special law I mean
that written law which regulates the life of a particular community;
by general law, all those unwritten principles which are supposed
to be acknowledged everywhere. We do things 'voluntarily' when we
do them consciously and without constraint. (Not all voluntary acts
are deliberate, but all deliberate acts are conscious-no one is ignorant
of what he deliberately intends.) The causes of our deliberately intending
harmful and wicked acts contrary to law are (1) vice, (2) lack of
self-control. For the wrongs a man does to others will correspond
to the bad quality or qualities that he himself possesses. Thus it
is the mean man who will wrong others about money, the profligate
in matters of physical pleasure, the effeminate in matters of comfort,
and the coward where danger is concerned-his terror makes him abandon
those who are involved in the same danger. The ambitious man does
wrong for sake of honour, the quick-tempered from anger, the lover
of victory for the sake of victory, the embittered man for the sake
of revenge, the stupid man because he has misguided notions of right
and wrong, the shameless man because he does not mind what people
think of him; and so with the rest-any wrong that any one does to
others corresponds to his particular faults of character.

However, this subject has already been cleared up in part in our discussion
of the virtues and will be further explained later when we treat of
the emotions. We have now to consider the motives and states of mind
of wrongdoers, and to whom they do wrong. 

Let us first decide what sort of things people are trying to get or
avoid when they set about doing wrong to others. For it is plain that
the prosecutor must consider, out of all the aims that can ever induce
us to do wrong to our neighbours, how many, and which, affect his
adversary; while the defendant must consider how many, and which,
do not affect him. Now every action of every person either is or is
not due to that person himself. Of those not due to himself some are
due to chance, the others to necessity; of these latter, again, some
are due to compulsion, the others to nature. Consequently all actions
that are not due to a man himself are due either to chance or to nature
or to compulsion. All actions that are due to a man himself and caused
by himself are due either to habit or to rational or irrational craving.
Rational craving is a craving for good, i.e. a wish-nobody wishes
for anything unless he thinks it good. Irrational craving is twofold,
viz. anger and appetite. 

Thus every action must be due to one or other of seven causes: chance,
nature, compulsion, habit, reasoning, anger, or appetite. It is superfluous
further to distinguish actions according to the doers' ages, moral
states, or the like; it is of course true that, for instance, young
men do have hot tempers and strong appetites; still, it is not through
youth that they act accordingly, but through anger or appetite. Nor,
again, is action due to wealth or poverty; it is of course true that
poor men, being short of money, do have an appetite for it, and that
rich men, being able to command needless pleasures, do have an appetite
for such pleasures: but here, again, their actions will be due not
to wealth or poverty but to appetite. Similarly, with just men, and
unjust men, and all others who are said to act in accordance with
their moral qualities, their actions will really be due to one of
the causes mentioned-either reasoning or emotion: due, indeed, sometimes
to good dispositions and good emotions, and sometimes to bad; but
that good qualities should be followed by good emotions, and bad by
bad, is merely an accessory fact-it is no doubt true that the temperate
man, for instance, because he is temperate, is always and at once
attended by healthy opinions and appetites in regard to pleasant things,
and the intemperate man by unhealthy ones. So we must ignore such
distinctions. Still we must consider what kinds of actions and of
people usually go together; for while there are no definite kinds
of action associated with the fact that a man is fair or dark, tall
or short, it does make a difference if he is young or old, just or
unjust. And, generally speaking, all those accessory qualities that
cause distinctions of human character are important: e.g. the sense
of wealth or poverty, of being lucky or unlucky. This shall be dealt
with later-let us now deal first with the rest of the subject before
us. 

The things that happen by chance are all those whose cause cannot
be determined, that have no purpose, and that happen neither always
nor usually nor in any fixed way. The definition of chance shows just
what they are. Those things happen by nature which have a fixed and
internal cause; they take place uniformly, either always or usually.
There is no need to discuss in exact detail the things that happen
contrary to nature, nor to ask whether they happen in some sense naturally
or from some other cause; it would seem that chance is at least partly
the cause of such events. Those things happen through compulsion which
take place contrary to the desire or reason of the doer, yet through
his own agency. Acts are done from habit which men do because they
have often done them before. Actions are due to reasoning when, in
view of any of the goods already mentioned, they appear useful either
as ends or as means to an end, and are performed for that reason:
'for that reason,' since even licentious persons perform a certain
number of useful actions, but because they are pleasant and not because
they are useful. To passion and anger are due all acts of revenge.
Revenge and punishment are different things. Punishment is inflicted
for the sake of the person punished; revenge for that of the punisher,
to satisfy his feelings. (What anger is will be made clear when we
come to discuss the emotions.) Appetite is the cause of all actions
that appear pleasant. Habit, whether acquired by mere familiarity
or by effort, belongs to the class of pleasant things, for there are
many actions not naturally pleasant which men perform with pleasure,
once they have become used to them. To sum up then, all actions due
to ourselves either are or seem to be either good or pleasant. Moreover,
as all actions due to ourselves are done voluntarily and actions not
due to ourselves are done involuntarily, it follows that all voluntary
actions must either be or seem to be either good or pleasant; for
I reckon among goods escape from evils or apparent evils and the exchange
of a greater evil for a less (since these things are in a sense positively
desirable), and likewise I count among pleasures escape from painful
or apparently painful things and the exchange of a greater pain for
a less. We must ascertain, then, the number and nature of the things
that are useful and pleasant. The useful has been previously examined
in connexion with political oratory; let us now proceed to examine
the pleasant. Our various definitions must be regarded as adequate,
even if they are not exact, provided they are clear. 

Part 11

We may lay it down that Pleasure is a movement, a movement by which
the soul as a whole is consciously brought into its normal state of
being; and that Pain is the opposite. If this is what pleasure is,
it is clear that the pleasant is what tends to produce this condition,
while that which tends to destroy it, or to cause the soul to be brought
into the opposite state, is painful. It must therefore be pleasant
as a rule to move towards a natural state of being, particularly when
a natural process has achieved the complete recovery of that natural
state. Habits also are pleasant; for as soon as a thing has become
habitual, it is virtually natural; habit is a thing not unlike nature;
what happens often is akin to what happens always, natural events
happening always, habitual events often. Again, that is pleasant which
is not forced on us; for force is unnatural, and that is why what
is compulsory, painful, and it has been rightly said 

"All that is done on compulsion is bitterness unto the soul.
"

So all acts of concentration, strong effort, and strain are necessarily
painful; they all involve compulsion and force, unless we are accustomed
to them, in which case it is custom that makes them pleasant. The
opposites to these are pleasant; and hence ease, freedom from toil,
relaxation, amusement, rest, and sleep belong to the class of pleasant
things; for these are all free from any element of compulsion. Everything,
too, is pleasant for which we have the desire within us, since desire
is the craving for pleasure. Of the desires some are irrational, some
associated with reason. By irrational I mean those which do not arise
from any opinion held by the mind. Of this kind are those known as
'natural'; for instance, those originating in the body, such as the
desire for nourishment, namely hunger and thirst, and a separate kind
of desire answering to each kind of nourishment; and the desires connected
with taste and sex and sensations of touch in general; and those of
smell, hearing, and vision. Rational desires are those which we are
induced to have; there are many things we desire to see or get because
we have been told of them and induced to believe them good. Further,
pleasure is the consciousness through the senses of a certain kind
of emotion; but imagination is a feeble sort of sensation, and there
will always be in the mind of a man who remembers or expects something
an image or picture of what he remembers or expects. If this is so,
it is clear that memory and expectation also, being accompanied by
sensation, may be accompanied by pleasure. It follows that anything
pleasant is either present and perceived, past and remembered, or
future and expected, since we perceive present pleasures, remember
past ones, and expect future ones. Now the things that are pleasant
to remember are not only those that, when actually perceived as present,
were pleasant, but also some things that were not, provided that their
results have subsequently proved noble and good. Hence the words

"Sweet 'tis when rescued to remember pain, "

and 

"Even his griefs are a joy long after to one that remembers

"All that he wrought and endured. "

The reason of this is that it is pleasant even to be merely free
from evil. The things it is pleasant to expect are those that when
present are felt to afford us either great delight or great but not
painful benefit. And in general, all the things that delight us when
they are present also do so, as a rule, when we merely remember or
expect them. Hence even being angry is pleasant-Homer said of wrath
that 

"Sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb dripping with sweetness-
"

for no one grows angry with a person on whom there is no prospect
of taking vengeance, and we feel comparatively little anger, or none
at all, with those who are much our superiors in power. Some pleasant
feeling is associated with most of our appetites we are enjoying either
the memory of a past pleasure or the expectation of a future one,
just as persons down with fever, during their attacks of thirst, enjoy
remembering the drinks they have had and looking forward to having
more. So also a lover enjoys talking or writing about his loved one,
or doing any little thing connected with him; all these things recall
him to memory and make him actually present to the eye of imagination.
Indeed, it is always the first sign of love, that besides enjoying
some one's presence, we remember him when he is gone, and feel pain
as well as pleasure, because he is there no longer. Similarly there
is an element of pleasure even in mourning and lamentation for the
departed. There is grief, indeed, at his loss, but pleasure in remembering
him and as it were seeing him before us in his deeds and in his life.
We can well believe the poet when he says 

"He spake, and in each man's heart he awakened 

"the love of lament. "

Revenge, too, is pleasant; it is pleasant to get anything that it
is painful to fail to get, and angry people suffer extreme pain when
they fail to get their revenge; but they enjoy the prospect of getting
it. Victory also is pleasant, and not merely to 'bad losers', but
to every one; the winner sees himself in the light of a champion,
and everybody has a more or less keen appetite for being that. The
pleasantness of victory implies of course that combative sports and
intellectual contests are pleasant (since in these it often happens
that some one wins) and also games like knuckle-bones, ball, dice,
and draughts. And similarly with the serious sports; some of these
become pleasant when one is accustomed to them; while others are pleasant
from the first, like hunting with hounds, or indeed any kind of hunting.
For where there is competition, there is victory. That is why forensic
pleading and debating contests are pleasant to those who are accustomed
to them and have the capacity for them. Honour and good repute are
among the most pleasant things of all; they make a man see himself
in the character of a fine fellow, especially when he is credited
with it by people whom he thinks good judges. His neighbours are better
judges than people at a distance; his associates and fellow-countrymen
better than strangers; his contemporaries better than posterity; sensible
persons better than foolish ones; a large number of people better
than a small number: those of the former class, in each case, are
the more likely to be good judges of him. Honour and credit bestowed
by those whom you think much inferior to yourself-e.g. children or
animals-you do not value: not for its own sake, anyhow: if you do
value it, it is for some other reason. Friends belong to the class
of pleasant things; it is pleasant to love-if you love wine, you certainly
find it delightful: and it is pleasant to be loved, for this too makes
a man see himself as the possessor of goodness, a thing that every
being that has a feeling for it desires to possess: to be loved means
to be valued for one's own personal qualities. To be admired is also
pleasant, simply because of the honour implied. Flattery and flatterers
are pleasant: the flatterer is a man who, you believe, admires and
likes To do the same thing often is pleasant, since, as we saw, anything
habitual is pleasant. And to change is also pleasant: change means
an approach to nature, whereas invariable repetition of anything causes
the excessive prolongation of a settled condition: therefore, says
the poet, 

"Change is in all things sweet. "

That is why what comes to us only at long intervals is pleasant,
whether it be a person or a thing; for it is a change from what we
had before, and, besides, what comes only at long intervals has the
value of rarity. Learning things and wondering at things are also
pleasant as a rule; wondering implies the desire of learning, so that
the object of wonder is an object of desire; while in learning one
is brought into one's natural condition. Conferring and receiving
benefits belong to the class of pleasant things; to receive a benefit
is to get what one desires; to confer a benefit implies both posses
sion and superiority, both of which are things we try to attain. It
is because beneficent acts are pleasant that people find it pleasant
to put their neighbours straight again and to supply what they lack.
Again, since learning and wondering are pleasant, it follows that
such things as acts of imitation must be pleasant-for instance, painting,
sculpture, poetry and every product of skilful imitation; this latter,
even if the object imitated is not itself pleasant; for it is not
the object itself which here gives delight; the spectator draws inferences
('That is a so-and-so') and thus learns something fresh. Dramatic
turns of fortune and hairbreadth escapes from perils are pleasant,
because we feel all such things are wonderful. 

And since what is natural is pleasant, and things akin to each other
seem natural to each other, therefore all kindred and similar things
are usually pleasant to each other; for instance, one man, horse,
or young person is pleasant to another man, horse, or young person.
Hence the proverbs 'mate delights mate', 'like to like', 'beast knows
beast', 'jackdaw to jackdaw', and the rest of them. But since everything
like and akin to oneself is pleasant, and since every man is himself
more like and akin to himself than any one else is, it follows that
all of us must be more or less fond of ourselves. For all this resemblance
and kinship is present particularly in the relation of an individual
to himself. And because we are all fond of ourselves, it follows that
what is our own is pleasant to all of us, as for instance our own
deeds and words. That is why we are usually fond of our flatterers,
[our lovers,] and honour; also of our children, for our children are
our own work. It is also pleasant to complete what is defective, for
the whole thing thereupon becomes our own work. And since power over
others is very pleasant, it is pleasant to be thought wise, for practical
wisdom secures us power over others. (Scientific wisdom is also pleasant,
because it is the knowledge of many wonderful things.) Again, since
most of us are ambitious, it must be pleasant to disparage our neighbours
as well as to have power over them. It is pleasant for a man to spend
his time over what he feels he can do best; just as the poet says,

"To that he bends himself, 

"To that each day allots most time, wherein 

"He is indeed the best part of himself. "

Similarly, since amusement and every kind of relaxation and laughter
too belong to the class of pleasant things, it follows that ludicrous
things are pleasant, whether men, words, or deeds. We have discussed
the ludicrous separately in the treatise on the Art of Poetry.

So much for the subject of pleasant things: by considering their opposites
we can easily see what things are unpleasant. 

Part 12

The above are the motives that make men do wrong to others; we are
next to consider the states of mind in which they do it, and the persons
to whom they do it. 

They must themselves suppose that the thing can be done, and done
by them: either that they can do it without being found out, or that
if they are found out they can escape being punished, or that if they
are punished the disadvantage will be less than the gain for themselves
or those they care for. The general subject of apparent possibility
and impossibility will be handled later on, since it is relevant not
only to forensic but to all kinds of speaking. But it may here be
said that people think that they can themselves most easily do wrong
to others without being punished for it if they possess eloquence,
or practical ability, or much legal experience, or a large body of
friends, or a great deal of money. Their confidence is greatest if
they personally possess the advantages mentioned: but even without
them they are satisfied if they have friends or supporters or partners
who do possess them: they can thus both commit their crimes and escape
being found out and punished for committing them. They are also safe,
they think, if they are on good terms with their victims or with the
judges who try them. Their victims will in that case not be on their
guard against being wronged, and will make some arrangement with them
instead of prosecuting; while their judges will favour them because
they like them, either letting them off altogether or imposing light
sentences. They are not likely to be found out if their appearance
contradicts the charges that might be brought against them: for instance,
a weakling is unlikely to be charged with violent assault, or a poor
and ugly man with adultery. Public and open injuries are the easiest
to do, because nobody could at all suppose them possible, and therefore
no precautions are taken. The same is true of crimes so great and
terrible that no man living could be suspected of them: here too no
precautions are taken. For all men guard against ordinary offences,
just as they guard against ordinary diseases; but no one takes precautions
against a disease that nobody has ever had. You feel safe, too, if
you have either no enemies or a great many; if you have none, you
expect not to be watched and therefore not to be detected; if you
have a great many, you will be watched, and therefore people will
think you can never risk an attempt on them, and you can defend your
innocence by pointing out that you could never have taken such a risk.
You may also trust to hide your crime by the way you do it or the
place you do it in, or by some convenient means of disposal.

You may feel that even if you are found out you can stave off a trial,
or have it postponed, or corrupt your judges: or that even if you
are sentenced you can avoid paying damages, or can at least postpone
doing so for a long time: or that you are so badly off that you will
have nothing to lose. You may feel that the gain to be got by wrong-doing
is great or certain or immediate, and that the penalty is small or
uncertain or distant. It may be that the advantage to be gained is
greater than any possible retribution: as in the case of despotic
power, according to the popular view. You may consider your crimes
as bringing you solid profit, while their punishment is nothing more
than being called bad names. Or the opposite argument may appeal to
you: your crimes may bring you some credit (thus you may, incidentally,
be avenging your father or mother, like Zeno), whereas the punishment
may amount to a fine, or banishment, or something of that sort. People
may be led on to wrong others by either of these motives or feelings;
but no man by both-they will affect people of quite opposite characters.
You may be encouraged by having often escaped detection or punishment
already; or by having often tried and failed; for in crime, as in
war, there are men who will always refuse to give up the struggle.
You may get your pleasure on the spot and the pain later, or the gain
on the spot and the loss later. That is what appeals to weak-willed
persons--and weakness of will may be shown with regard to all the
objects of desire. It may on the contrary appeal to you as it does
appeal to self-controlled and sensible people--that the pain and loss
are immediate, while the pleasure and profit come later and last longer.
You may feel able to make it appear that your crime was due to chance,
or to necessity, or to natural causes, or to habit: in fact, to put
it generally, as if you had failed to do right rather than actually
done wrong. You may be able to trust other people to judge you equitably.
You may be stimulated by being in want: which may mean that you want
necessaries, as poor people do, or that you want luxuries, as rich
people do. You may be encouraged by having a particularly good reputation,
because that will save you from being suspected: or by having a particularly
bad one, because nothing you are likely to do will make it worse.

The above, then, are the various states of mind in which a man sets
about doing wrong to others. The kind of people to whom he does wrong,
and the ways in which he does it, must be considered next. The people
to whom he does it are those who have what he wants himself, whether
this means necessities or luxuries and materials for enjoyment. His
victims may be far off or near at hand. If they are near, he gets
his profit quickly; if they are far off, vengeance is slow, as those
think who plunder the Carthaginians. They may be those who are trustful
instead of being cautious and watchful, since all such people are
easy to elude. Or those who are too easy-going to have enough energy
to prosecute an offender. Or sensitive people, who are not apt to
show fight over questions of money. Or those who have been wronged
already by many people, and yet have not prosecuted; such men must
surely be the proverbial 'Mysian prey'. Or those who have either never
or often been wronged before; in neither case will they take precautions;
if they have never been wronged they think they never will, and if
they have often been wronged they feel that surely it cannot happen
again. Or those whose character has been attacked in the past, or
is exposed to attack in the future: they will be too much frightened
of the judges to make up their minds to prosecute, nor can they win
their case if they do: this is true of those who are hated or unpopular.
Another likely class of victim is those who their injurer can pretend
have, themselves or through their ancestors or friends, treated badly,
or intended to treat badly, the man himself, or his ancestors, or
those he cares for; as the proverb says, 'wickedness needs but a pretext'.
A man may wrong his enemies, because that is pleasant: he may equally
wrong his friends, because that is easy. Then there are those who
have no friends, and those who lack eloquence and practical capacity;
these will either not attempt to prosecute, or they will come to terms,
or failing that they will lose their case. There are those whom it
does not pay to waste time in waiting for trial or damages, such as
foreigners and small farmers; they will settle for a trifle, and always
be ready to leave off. Also those who have themselves wronged others,
either often, or in the same way as they are now being wronged themselves-for
it is felt that next to no wrong is done to people when it is the
same wrong as they have often themselves done to others: if, for instance,
you assault a man who has been accustomed to behave with violence
to others. So too with those who have done wrong to others, or have
meant to, or mean to, or are likely to do so; there is something fine
and pleasant in wronging such persons, it seems as though almost no
wrong were done. Also those by doing wrong to whom we shall be gratifying
our friends, or those we admire or love, or our masters, or in general
the people by reference to whom we mould our lives. Also those whom
we may wrong and yet be sure of equitable treatment. Also those against
whom we have had any grievance, or any previous differences with them,
as Callippus had when he behaved as he did to Dion: here too it seems
as if almost no wrong were being done. Also those who are on the point
of being wronged by others if we fail to wrong them ourselves, since
here we feel we have no time left for thinking the matter over. So
Aenesidemus is said to have sent the 'cottabus' prize to Gelon, who
had just reduced a town to slavery, because Gelon had got there first
and forestalled his own attempt. Also those by wronging whom we shall
be able to do many righteous acts; for we feel that we can then easily
cure the harm done. Thus Jason the Thessalian said that it is a duty
to do some unjust acts in order to be able to do many just ones.

Among the kinds of wrong done to others are those that are done universally,
or at least commonly: one expects to be forgiven for doing these.
Also those that can easily be kept dark, as where things that can
rapidly be consumed like eatables are concerned, or things that can
easily be changed in shape, colour, or combination, or things that
can easily be stowed away almost anywhere-portable objects that you
can stow away in small corners, or things so like others of which
you have plenty already that nobody can tell the difference. There
are also wrongs of a kind that shame prevents the victim speaking
about, such as outrages done to the women in his household or to himself
or to his sons. Also those for which you would be thought very litigious
to prosecute any one-trifling wrongs, or wrongs for which people are
usually excused. 

The above is a fairly complete account of the circumstances under
which men do wrong to others, of the sort of wrongs they do, of the
sort of persons to whom they do them, and of their reasons for doing
them. 

Part 13

It will now be well to make a complete classification of just and
unjust actions. We may begin by observing that they have been defined
relatively to two kinds of law, and also relatively to two classes
of persons. By the two kinds of law I mean particular law and universal
law. Particular law is that which each community lays down and applies
to its own members: this is partly written and partly unwritten. Universal
law is the law of Nature. For there really is, as every one to some
extent divines, a natural justice and injustice that is binding on
all men, even on those who have no association or covenant with each
other. It is this that Sophocles' Antigone clearly means when she
says that the burial of Polyneices was a just act in spite of the
prohibition: she means that it was just by nature. 

"Not of to-day or yesterday it is, 

"But lives eternal: none can date its birth. "

And so Empedocles, when he bids us kill no living creature, says
that doing this is not just for some people while unjust for others,

"Nay, but, an all-embracing law, through the realms of the sky

"Unbroken it stretcheth, and over the earth's immensity.
"

And as Alcidamas says in his Messeniac Oration.... 

The actions that we ought to do or not to do have also been divided
into two classes as affecting either the whole community or some one
of its members. From this point of view we can perform just or unjust
acts in either of two ways-towards one definite person, or towards
the community. The man who is guilty of adultery or assault is doing
wrong to some definite person; the man who avoids service in the army
is doing wrong to the community. 

Thus the whole class of unjust actions may be divided into two classes,
those affecting the community, and those affecting one or more other
persons. We will next, before going further, remind ourselves of what
'being wronged' means. Since it has already been settled that 'doing
a wrong' must be intentional, 'being wronged' must consist in having
an injury done to you by some one who intends to do it. In order to
be wronged, a man must (1) suffer actual harm, (2) suffer it against
his will. The various possible forms of harm are clearly explained
by our previous, separate discussion of goods and evils. We have also
seen that a voluntary action is one where the doer knows what he is
doing. We now see that every accusation must be of an action affecting
either the community or some individual. The doer of the action must
either understand and intend the action, or not understand and intend
it. In the former case, he must be acting either from deliberate choice
or from passion. (Anger will be discussed when we speak of the passions
the motives for crime and the state of mind of the criminal have already
been discussed.) Now it often happens that a man will admit an act,
but will not admit the prosecutor's label for the act nor the facts
which that label implies. He will admit that he took a thing but not
that he 'stole' it; that he struck some one first, but not that he
committed 'outrage'; that he had intercourse with a woman, but not
that he committed 'adultery'; that he is guilty of theft, but not
that he is guilty of 'sacrilege', the object stolen not being consecrated;
that he has encroached, but not that he has 'encroached on State lands';
that he has been in communication with the enemy, but not that he
has been guilty of 'treason'. Here therefore we must be able to distinguish
what is theft, outrage, or adultery, from what is not, if we are to
be able to make the justice of our case clear, no matter whether our
aim is to establish a man's guilt or to establish his innocence. Wherever
such charges are brought against a man, the question is whether he
is or is not guilty of a criminal offence. It is deliberate purpose
that constitutes wickedness and criminal guilt, and such names as
'outrage' or 'theft' imply deliberate purpose as well as the mere
action. A blow does not always amount to 'outrage', but only if it
is struck with some such purpose as to insult the man struck or gratify
the striker himself. Nor does taking a thing without the owner's knowledge
always amount to 'theft', but only if it is taken with the intention
of keeping it and injuring the owner. And as with these charges, so
with all the others. 

We saw that there are two kinds of right and wrong conduct towards
others, one provided for by written ordinances, the other by unwritten.
We have now discussed the kind about which the laws have something
to say. The other kind has itself two varieties. First, there is the
conduct that springs from exceptional goodness or badness, and is
visited accordingly with censure and loss of honour, or with praise
and increase of honour and decorations: for instance, gratitude to,
or requital of, our benefactors, readiness to help our friends, and
the like. The second kind makes up for the defects of a community's
written code of law. This is what we call equity; people regard it
as just; it is, in fact, the sort of justice which goes beyond the
written law. Its existence partly is and partly is not intended by
legislators; not intended, where they have noticed no defect in the
law; intended, where find themselves unable to define things exactly,
and are obliged to legislate as if that held good always which in
fact only holds good usually; or where it is not easy to be complete
owing to the endless possible cases presented, such as the kinds and
sizes of weapons that may be used to inflict wounds-a lifetime would
be too short to make out a complete list of these. If, then, a precise
statement is impossible and yet legislation is necessary, the law
must be expressed in wide terms; and so, if a man has no more than
a finger-ring on his hand when he lifts it to strike or actually strikes
another man, he is guilty of a criminal act according to the unwritten
words of the law; but he is innocent really, and it is equity that
declares him to be so. From this definition of equity it is plain
what sort of actions, and what sort of persons, are equitable or the
reverse. Equity must be applied to forgivable actions; and it must
make us distinguish between criminal acts on the one hand, and errors
of judgement, or misfortunes, on the other. (A 'misfortune' is an
act, not due to moral badness, that has unexpected results: an 'error
of judgement' is an act, also not due to moral badness, that has results
that might have been expected: a 'criminal act' has results that might
have been expected, but is due to moral badness, for that is the source
of all actions inspired by our appetites.) Equity bids us be merciful
to the weakness of human nature; to think less about the laws than
about the man who framed them, and less about what he said than about
what he meant; not to consider the actions of the accused so much
as his intentions, nor this or that detail so much as the whole story;
to ask not what a man is now but what he has always or usually been.
It bids us remember benefits rather than injuries, and benefits received
rather than benefits conferred; to be patient when we are wronged;
to settle a dispute by negotiation and not by force; to prefer arbitration
to motion-for an arbitrator goes by the equity of a case, a judge
by the strict law, and arbitration was invented with the express purpose
of securing full power for equity. 

The above may be taken as a sufficient account of the nature of equity.

Part 14

The worse of two acts of wrong done to others is that which is prompted
by the worse disposition. Hence the most trifling acts may be the
worst ones; as when Callistratus charged Melanopus with having cheated
the temple-builders of three consecrated half-obols. The converse
is true of just acts. This is because the greater is here potentially
contained in the less: there is no crime that a man who has stolen
three consecrated half-obols would shrink from committing. Sometimes,
however, the worse act is reckoned not in this way but by the greater
harm that it does. Or it may be because no punishment for it is severe
enough to be adequate; or the harm done may be incurable-a difficult
and even hopeless crime to defend; or the sufferer may not be able
to get his injurer legally punished, a fact that makes the harm incurable,
since legal punishment and chastisement are the proper cure. Or again,
the man who has suffered wrong may have inflicted some fearful punishment
on himself; then the doer of the wrong ought in justice to receive
a still more fearful punishment. Thus Sophocles, when pleading for
retribution to Euctemon, who had cut his own throat because of the
outrage done to him, said he would not fix a penalty less than the
victim had fixed for himself. Again, a man's crime is worse if he
has been the first man, or the only man, or almost the only man, to
commit it: or if it is by no means the first time he has gone seriously
wrong in the same way: or if his crime has led to the thinking-out
and invention of measures to prevent and punish similar crimes-thus
in Argos a penalty is inflicted on a man on whose account a law is
passed, and also on those on whose account the prison was built: or
if a crime is specially brutal, or specially deliberate: or if the
report of it awakes more terror than pity. There are also such rhetorically
effective ways of putting it as the following: That the accused has
disregarded and broken not one but many solemn obligations like oaths,
promises, pledges, or rights of intermarriage between states-here
the crime is worse because it consists of many crimes; and that the
crime was committed in the very place where criminals are punished,
as for example perjurers do-it is argued that a man who will commit
a crime in a law-court would commit it anywhere. Further, the worse
deed is that which involves the doer in special shame; that whereby
a man wrongs his benefactors-for he does more than one wrong, by not
merely doing them harm but failing to do them good; that which breaks
the unwritten laws of justice-the better sort of man will be just
without being forced to be so, and the written laws depend on force
while the unwritten ones do not. It may however be argued otherwise,
that the crime is worse which breaks the written laws: for the man
who commits crimes for which terrible penalties are provided will
not hesitate over crimes for which no penalty is provided at all.-So
much, then, for the comparative badness of criminal actions.

Part 15

There are also the so-called 'non-technical' means of persuasion;
and we must now take a cursory view of these, since they are specially
characteristic of forensic oratory. They are five in number: laws,
witnesses, contracts, tortures, oaths. 

First, then, let us take laws and see how they are to be used in persuasion
and dissuasion, in accusation and defence. If the written law tells
against our case, clearly we must appeal to the universal law, and
insist on its greater equity and justice. We must argue that the juror's
oath 'I will give my verdict according to honest opinion' means that
one will not simply follow the letter of the written law. We must
urge that the principles of equity are permanent and changeless, and
that the universal law does not change either, for it is the law of
nature, whereas written laws often do change. This is the bearing
the lines in Sophocles' Antigone, where Antigone pleads that in burying
her brother she had broken Creon's law, but not the unwritten law:

"Not of to-day or yesterday they are, 

"But live eternal: (none can date their birth.) 

"Not I would fear the wrath of any man 

"(And brave God's vengeance) for defying these. "

We shall argue that justice indeed is true and profitable, but that
sham justice is not, and that consequently the written law is not,
because it does not fulfil the true purpose of law. Or that justice
is like silver, and must be assayed by the judges, if the genuine
is to be distinguished from the counterfeit. Or that the better a
man is, the more he will follow and abide by the unwritten law in
preference to the written. Or perhaps that the law in question contradicts
some other highly-esteemed law, or even contradicts itself. Thus it
may be that one law will enact that all contracts must be held binding,
while another forbids us ever to make illegal contracts. Or if a law
is ambiguous, we shall turn it about and consider which construction
best fits the interests of justice or utility, and then follow that
way of looking at it. Or if, though the law still exists, the situation
to meet which it was passed exists no longer, we must do our best
to prove this and to combat the law thereby. If however the written
law supports our case, we must urge that the oath 'to give my verdict
according to my honest opinion' not meant to make the judges give
a verdict that is contrary to the law, but to save them from the guilt
of perjury if they misunderstand what the law really means. Or that
no one chooses what is absolutely good, but every one what is good
for himself. Or that not to use the laws is as ahas to have no laws
at all. Or that, as in the other arts, it does not pay to try to be
cleverer than the doctor: for less harm comes from the doctor's mistakes
than from the growing habit of disobeying authority. Or that trying
to be cleverer than the laws is just what is forbidden by those codes
of law that are accounted best.-So far as the laws are concerned,
the above discussion is probably sufficient. 

As to witnesses, they are of two kinds, the ancient and the recent;
and these latter, again, either do or do not share in the risks of
the trial. By 'ancient' witnesses I mean the poets and all other notable
persons whose judgements are known to all. Thus the Athenians appealed
to Homer as a witness about Salamis; and the men of Tenedos not long
ago appealed to Periander of Corinth in their dispute with the people
of Sigeum; and Cleophon supported his accusation of Critias by quoting
the elegiac verse of Solon, maintaining that discipline had long been
slack in the family of Critias, or Solon would never have written,

"Pray thee, bid the red-haired Critias do what 

"his father commands him. "

These witnesses are concerned with past events. As to future events
we shall also appeal to soothsayers: thus Themistocles quoted the
oracle about 'the wooden wall' as a reason for engaging the enemy's
fleet. Further, proverbs are, as has been said, one form of evidence.
Thus if you are urging somebody not to make a friend of an old man,
you will appeal to the proverb, 

"Never show an old man kindness. "

Or if you are urging that he who has made away with fathers should
also make away with their sons, quote, 

"Fool, who slayeth the father and leaveth his sons to avenge him.
"

'Recent' witnesses are well-known people who have expressed their
opinions about some disputed matter: such opinions will be useful
support for subsequent disputants on the same oints: thus Eubulus
used in the law-courts against the reply Plato had made to Archibius,
'It has become the regular custom in this country to admit that one
is a scoundrel'. There are also those witnesses who share the risk
of punishment if their evidence is pronounced false. These are valid
witnesses to the fact that an action was or was not done, that something
is or is not the case; they are not valid witnesses to the quality
of an action, to its being just or unjust, useful or harmful. On such
questions of quality the opinion of detached persons is highly trustworthy.
Most trustworthy of all are the 'ancient' witnesses, since they cannot
be corrupted. 

In dealing with the evidence of witnesses, the following are useful
arguments. If you have no witnesses on your side, you will argue that
the judges must decide from what is probable; that this is meant by
'giving a verdict in accordance with one's honest opinion'; that probabilities
cannot be bribed to mislead the court; and that probabilities are
never convicted of perjury. If you have witnesses, and the other man
has not, you will argue that probabilities cannot be put on their
trial, and that we could do without the evidence of witnesses altogether
if we need do no more than balance the pleas advanced on either side.

The evidence of witnesses may refer either to ourselves or to our
opponent; and either to questions of fact or to questions of personal
character: so, clearly, we need never be at a loss for useful evidence.
For if we have no evidence of fact supporting our own case or telling
against that of our opponent, at least we can always find evidence
to prove our own worth or our opponent's worthlessness. Other arguments
about a witness-that he is a friend or an enemy or neutral, or has
a good, bad, or indifferent reputation, and any other such distinctions-we
must construct upon the same general lines as we use for the regular
rhetorical proofs. 

Concerning contracts argument can be so far employed as to increase
or diminish their importance and their credibility; we shall try to
increase both if they tell in our favour, and to diminish both if
they tell in favour of our opponent. Now for confirming or upsetting
the credibility of contracts the procedure is just the same as for
dealing with witnesses, for the credit to be attached to contracts
depends upon the character of those who have signed them or have the
custody of them. The contract being once admitted genuine, we must
insist on its importance, if it supports our case. We may argue that
a contract is a law, though of a special and limited kind; and that,
while contracts do not of course make the law binding, the law does
make any lawful contract binding, and that the law itself as a whole
is a of contract, so that any one who disregards or repudiates any
contract is repudiating the law itself. Further, most business relations-those,
namely, that are voluntary-are regulated by contracts, and if these
lose their binding force, human intercourse ceases to exist. We need
not go very deep to discover the other appropriate arguments of this
kind. If, however, the contract tells against us and for our opponents,
in the first place those arguments are suitable which we can use to
fight a law that tells against us. We do not regard ourselves as bound
to observe a bad law which it was a mistake ever to pass: and it is
ridiculous to suppose that we are bound to observe a bad and mistaken
contract. Again, we may argue that the duty of the judge as umpire
is to decide what is just, and therefore he must ask where justice
lies, and not what this or that document means. And that it is impossible
to pervert justice by fraud or by force, since it is founded on nature,
but a party to a contract may be the victim of either fraud or force.
Moreover, we must see if the contract contravenes either universal
law or any written law of our own or another country; and also if
it contradicts any other previous or subsequent contract; arguing
that the subsequent is the binding contract, or else that the previous
one was right and the subsequent one fraudulent-whichever way suits
us. Further, we must consider the question of utility, noting whether
the contract is against the interest of the judges or not; and so
on-these arguments are as obvious as the others. 

Examination by torture is one form of evidence, to which great weight
is often attached because it is in a sense compulsory. Here again
it is not hard to point out the available grounds for magnifying its
value, if it happens to tell in our favour, and arguing that it is
the only form of evidence that is infallible; or, on the other hand,
for refuting it if it tells against us and for our opponent, when
we may say what is true of torture of every kind alike, that people
under its compulsion tell lies quite as often as they tell the truth,
sometimes persistently refusing to tell the truth, sometimes recklessly
making a false charge in order to be let off sooner. We ought to be
able to quote cases, familiar to the judges, in which this sort of
thing has actually happened. [We must say that evidence under torture
is not trustworthy, the fact being that many men whether thick-witted,
tough-skinned, or stout of heart endure their ordeal nobly, while
cowards and timid men are full of boldness till they see the ordeal
of these others: so that no trust can be placed in evidence under
torture.] 

In regard to oaths, a fourfold division can be made. A man may either
both offer and accept an oath, or neither, or one without the other-that
is, he may offer an oath but not accept one, or accept an oath but
not offer one. There is also the situation that arises when an oath
has already been sworn either by himself or by his opponent.

If you refuse to offer an oath, you may argue that men do not hesitate
to perjure themselves; and that if your opponent does swear, you lose
your money, whereas, if he does not, you think the judges will decide
against him; and that the risk of an unfavourable verdict is prefer,
able, since you trust the judges and do not trust him. 

If you refuse to accept an oath, you may argue that an oath is always
paid for; that you would of course have taken it if you had been a
rascal, since if you are a rascal you had better make something by
it, and you would in that case have to swear in order to succeed.
Thus your refusal, you argue, must be due to high principle, not to
fear of perjury: and you may aptly quote the saying of Xenophanes,

"'Tis not fair that he who fears not God 

"should challenge him who doth. "

It is as if a strong man were to challenge a weakling to strike,
or be struck by, him. 

If you agree to accept an oath, you may argue that you trust yourself
but not your opponent; and that (to invert the remark of Xenophanes)
the fair thing is for the impious man to offer the oath and for the
pious man to accept it; and that it would be monstrous if you yourself
were unwilling to accept an oath in a case where you demand that the
judges should do so before giving their verdict. If you wish to offer
an oath, you may argue that piety disposes you to commit the issue
to the gods; and that your opponent ought not to want other judges
than himself, since you leave the decision with him; and that it is
outrageous for your opponents to refuse to swear about this question,
when they insist that others should do so. 

Now that we see how we are to argue in each case separately, we see
also how we are to argue when they occur in pairs, namely, when you
are willing to accept the oath but not to offer it; to offer it but
not to accept it; both to accept and to offer it; or to do neither.
These are of course combinations of the cases already mentioned, and
so your arguments also must be combinations of the arguments already
mentioned. 

If you have already sworn an oath that contradicts your present one,
you must argue that it is not perjury, since perjury is a crime, and
a crime must be a voluntary action, whereas actions due to the force
or fraud of others are involuntary. You must further reason from this
that perjury depends on the intention and not on the spoken words.
But if it is your opponent who has already sworn an oath that contradicts
his present one, you must say that if he does not abide by his oaths
he is the enemy of society, and that this is the reason why men take
an oath before administering the laws. 'My opponents insist that you,
the judges, must abide by the oath you have sworn, and yet they are
not abiding by their own oaths.' And there are other arguments which
may be used to magnify the importance of the oath. [So much, then,
for the 'non-technical' modes of persuasion.] 



BOOK II

Part 1 

We have now considered the materials to be used in supporting or
opposing a political measure, in pronouncing eulogies or censures,
and for prosecution and defence in the law courts. We have considered
the received opinions on which we may best base our arguments so as
to convince our hearers-those opinions with which our enthymemes deal,
and out of which they are built, in each of the three kinds of oratory,
according to what may be called the special needs of each.

But since rhetoric exists to affect the giving of decisions-the hearers
decide between one political speaker and another, and a legal verdict
is a decision-the orator must not only try to make the argument of
his speech demonstrative and worthy of belief; he must also make his
own character look right and put his hearers, who are to decide, into
the right frame of mind. Particularly in political oratory, but also
in lawsuits, it adds much to an orator's influence that his own character
should look right and that he should be thought to entertain the right
feelings towards his hearers; and also that his hearers themselves
should be in just the right frame of mind. That the orator's own character
should look right is particularly important in political speaking:
that the audience should be in the right frame of mind, in lawsuits.
When people are feeling friendly and placable, they think one sort
of thing; when they are feeling angry or hostile, they think either
something totally different or the same thing with a different intensity:
when they feel friendly to the man who comes before them for judgement,
they regard him as having done little wrong, if any; when they feel
hostile, they take the opposite view. Again, if they are eager for,
and have good hopes of, a thing that will be pleasant if it happens,
they think that it certainly will happen and be good for them: whereas
if they are indifferent or annoyed, they do not think so.

There are three things which inspire confidence in the orator's own
character-the three, namely, that induce us to believe a thing apart
from any proof of it: good sense, good moral character, and goodwill.
False statements and bad advice are due to one or more of the following
three causes. Men either form a false opinion through want of good
sense; or they form a true opinion, but because of their moral badness
do not say what they really think; or finally, they are both sensible
and upright, but not well disposed to their hearers, and may fail
in consequence to recommend what they know to be the best course.
These are the only possible cases. It follows that any one who is
thought to have all three of these good qualities will inspire trust
in his audience. The way to make ourselves thought to be sensible
and morally good must be gathered from the analysis of goodness already
given: the way to establish your own goodness is the same as the way
to establish that of others. Good will and friendliness of disposition
will form part of our discussion of the emotions, to which we must
now turn. 

The Emotions are all those feelings that so change men as to affect
their judgements, and that are also attended by pain or pleasure.
Such are anger, pity, fear and the like, with their opposites. We
must arrange what we have to say about each of them under three heads.
Take, for instance, the emotion of anger: here we must discover (1)
what the state of mind of angry people is, (2) who the people are
with whom they usually get angry, and (3) on what grounds they get
angry with them. It is not enough to know one or even two of these
points; unless we know all three, we shall be unable to arouse anger
in any one. The same is true of the other emotions. So just as earlier
in this work we drew up a list of useful propositions for the orator,
let us now proceed in the same way to analyse the subject before us.

Part 2

Anger may be defined as an impulse, accompanied by pain, to a conspicuous
revenge for a conspicuous slight directed without justification towards
what concerns oneself or towards what concerns one's friends. If this
is a proper definition of anger, it must always be felt towards some
particular individual, e.g. Cleon, and not 'man' in general. It must
be felt because the other has done or intended to do something to
him or one of his friends. It must always be attended by a certain
pleasure-that which arises from the expectation of revenge. For since
nobody aims at what he thinks he cannot attain, the angry man is aiming
at what he can attain, and the belief that you will attain your aim
is pleasant. Hence it has been well said about wrath, 

"Sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb 

"dripping with sweetness, 

"And spreads through the hearts of men. "

It is also attended by a certain pleasure because the thoughts dwell
upon the act of vengeance, and the images then called up cause pleasure,
like the images called up in dreams. 

Now slighting is the actively entertained opinion of something as
obviously of no importance. We think bad things, as well as good ones,
have serious importance; and we think the same of anything that tends
to produce such things, while those which have little or no such tendency
we consider unimportant. There are three kinds of slighting-contempt,
spite, and insolence. (1) Contempt is one kind of slighting: you feel
contempt for what you consider unimportant, and it is just such things
that you slight. (2) Spite is another kind; it is a thwarting another
man's wishes, not to get something yourself but to prevent his getting
it. The slight arises just from the fact that you do not aim at something
for yourself: clearly you do not think that he can do you harm, for
then you would be afraid of him instead of slighting him, nor yet
that he can do you any good worth mentioning, for then you would be
anxious to make friends with him. (3) Insolence is also a form of
slighting, since it consists in doing and saying things that cause
shame to the victim, not in order that anything may happen to yourself,
or because anything has happened to yourself, but simply for the pleasure
involved. (Retaliation is not 'insolence', but vengeance.) The cause
of the pleasure thus enjoyed by the insolent man is that he thinks
himself greatly superior to others when ill-treating them. That is
why youths and rich men are insolent; they think themselves superior
when they show insolence. One sort of insolence is to rob people of
the honour due to them; you certainly slight them thus; for it is
the unimportant, for good or evil, that has no honour paid to it.
So Achilles says in anger: 

"He hath taken my prize for himself 

"and hath done me dishonour, "

and 

"Like an alien honoured by none, "

meaning that this is why he is angry. A man expects to be specially
respected by his inferiors in birth, in capacity, in goodness, and
generally in anything in which he is much their superior: as where
money is concerned a wealthy man looks for respect from a poor man;
where speaking is concerned, the man with a turn for oratory looks
for respect from one who cannot speak; the ruler demands the respect
of the ruled, and the man who thinks he ought to be a ruler demands
the respect of the man whom he thinks he ought to be ruling. Hence
it has been said 

"Great is the wrath of kings, whose father is Zeus almighty,
"

and 

"Yea, but his rancour abideth long afterward also, "

their great resentment being due to their great superiority. Then
again a man looks for respect from those who he thinks owe him good
treatment, and these are the people whom he has treated or is treating
well, or means or has meant to treat well, either himself, or through
his friends, or through others at his request. 

It will be plain by now, from what has been said, (1) in what frame
of mind, (2) with what persons, and (3) on what grounds people grow
angry. (1) The frame of mind is that of one in which any pain is being
felt. In that condition, a man is always aiming at something. Whether,
then, another man opposes him either directly in any way, as by preventing
him from drinking when he is thirsty, or indirectly, the act appears
to him just the same; whether some one works against him, or fails
to work with him, or otherwise vexes him while he is in this mood,
he is equally angry in all these cases. Hence people who are afflicted
by sickness or poverty or love or thirst or any other unsatisfied
desires are prone to anger and easily roused: especially against those
who slight their present distress. Thus a sick man is angered by disregard
of his illness, a poor man by disregard of his poverty, a man aging
war by disregard of the war he is waging, a lover by disregard of
his love, and so throughout, any other sort of slight being enough
if special slights are wanting. Each man is predisposed, by the emotion
now controlling him, to his own particular anger. Further, we are
angered if we happen to be expecting a contrary result: for a quite
unexpected evil is specially painful, just as the quite unexpected
fulfilment of our wishes is specially pleasant. Hence it is plain
what seasons, times, conditions, and periods of life tend to stir
men easily to anger, and where and when this will happen; and it is
plain that the more we are under these conditions the more easily
we are stirred. 

These, then, are the frames of mind in which men are easily stirred
to anger. The persons with whom we get angry are those who laugh,
mock, or jeer at us, for such conduct is insolent. Also those who
inflict injuries upon us that are marks of insolence. These injuries
must be such as are neither retaliatory nor profitable to the doers:
for only then will they be felt to be due to insolence. Also those
who speak ill of us, and show contempt for us, in connexion with the
things we ourselves most care about: thus those who are eager to win
fame as philosophers get angry with those who show contempt for their
philosophy; those who pride themselves upon their appearance get angry
with those who show contempt for their appearance and so on in other
cases. We feel particularly angry on this account if we suspect that
we are in fact, or that people think we are, lacking completely or
to any effective extent in the qualities in question. For when we
are convinced that we excel in the qualities for which we are jeered
at, we can ignore the jeering. Again, we are angrier with our friends
than with other people, since we feel that our friends ought to treat
us well and not badly. We are angry with those who have usually treated
us with honour or regard, if a change comes and they behave to us
otherwise: for we think that they feel contempt for us, or they would
still be behaving as they did before. And with those who do not return
our kindnesses or fail to return them adequately, and with those who
oppose us though they are our inferiors: for all such persons seem
to feel contempt for us; those who oppose us seem to think us inferior
to themselves, and those who do not return our kindnesses seem to
think that those kindnesses were conferred by inferiors. And we feel
particularly angry with men of no account at all, if they slight us.
For, by our hypothesis, the anger caused by the slight is felt towards
people who are not justified in slighting us, and our inferiors are
not thus justified. Again, we feel angry with friends if they do not
speak well of us or treat us well; and still more, if they do the
contrary; or if they do not perceive our needs, which is why Plexippus
is angry with Meleager in Antiphon's play; for this want of perception
shows that they are slighting us-we do not fail to perceive the needs
of those for whom we care. Again we are angry with those who rejoice
at our misfortunes or simply keep cheerful in the midst of our misfortunes,
since this shows that they either hate us or are slighting us. Also
with those who are indifferent to the pain they give us: this is why
we get angry with bringers of bad news. And with those who listen
to stories about us or keep on looking at our weaknesses; this seems
like either slighting us or hating us; for those who love us share
in all our distresses and it must distress any one to keep on looking
at his own weaknesses. Further, with those who slight us before five
classes of people: namely, (1) our rivals, (2) those whom we admire,
(3) those whom we wish to admire us, (4) those for whom we feel reverence,
(5) those who feel reverence for us: if any one slights us before
such persons, we feel particularly angry. Again, we feel angry with
those who slight us in connexion with what we are as honourable men
bound to champion-our parents, children, wives, or subjects. And with
those who do not return a favour, since such a slight is unjustifiable.
Also with those who reply with humorous levity when we are speaking
seriously, for such behaviour indicates contempt. And with those who
treat us less well than they treat everybody else; it is another mark
of contempt that they should think we do not deserve what every one
else deserves. Forgetfulness, too, causes anger, as when our own names
are forgotten, trifling as this may be; since forgetfulness is felt
to be another sign that we are being slighted; it is due to negligence,
and to neglect us is to slight us. 

The persons with whom we feel anger, the frame of mind in which we
feel it, and the reasons why we feel it, have now all been set forth.
Clearly the orator will have to speak so as to bring his hearers into
a frame of mind that will dispose them to anger, and to represent
his adversaries as open to such charges and possessed of such qualities
as do make people angry. 

Part 3

Since growing calm is the opposite of growing angry, and calmness
the opposite of anger, we must ascertain in what frames of mind men
are calm, towards whom they feel calm, and by what means they are
made so. Growing calm may be defined as a settling down or quieting
of anger. Now we get angry with those who slight us; and since slighting
is a voluntary act, it is plain that we feel calm towards those who
do nothing of the kind, or who do or seem to do it involuntarily.
Also towards those who intended to do the opposite of what they did
do. Also towards those who treat themselves as they have treated us:
since no one can be supposed to slight himself. Also towards those
who admit their fault and are sorry: since we accept their grief at
what they have done as satisfaction, and cease to be angry. The punishment
of servants shows this: those who contradict us and deny their offence
we punish all the more, but we cease to be incensed against those
who agree that they deserved their punishment. The reason is that
it is shameless to deny what is obvious, and those who are shameless
towards us slight us and show contempt for us: anyhow, we do not feel
shame before those of whom we are thoroughly contemptuous. Also we
feel calm towards those who humble themselves before us and do not
gainsay us; we feel that they thus admit themselves our inferiors,
and inferiors feel fear, and nobody can slight any one so long as
he feels afraid of him. That our anger ceases towards those who humble
themselves before us is shown even by dogs, who do not bite people
when they sit down. We also feel calm towards those who are serious
when we are serious, because then we feel that we are treated seriously
and not contemptuously. Also towards those who have done us more kindnesses
than we have done them. Also towards those who pray to us and beg
for mercy, since they humble themselves by doing so. Also towards
those who do not insult or mock at or slight any one at all, or not
any worthy person or any one like ourselves. In general, the things
that make us calm may be inferred by seeing what the opposites are
of those that make us angry. We are not angry with people we fear
or respect, as long as we fear or respect them; you cannot be afraid
of a person and also at the same time angry with him. Again, we feel
no anger, or comparatively little, with those who have done what they
did through anger: we do not feel that they have done it from a wish
to slight us, for no one slights people when angry with them, since
slighting is painless, and anger is painful. Nor do we grow angry
with those who reverence us. 

As to the frame of mind that makes people calm, it is plainly the
opposite to that which makes them angry, as when they are amusing
themselves or laughing or feasting; when they are feeling prosperous
or successful or satisfied; when, in fine, they are enjoying freedom
from pain, or inoffensive pleasure, or justifiable hope. Also when
time has passed and their anger is no longer fresh, for time puts
an end to anger. And vengeance previously taken on one person puts
an end to even greater anger felt against another person. Hence Philocrates,
being asked by some one, at a time when the public was angry with
him, 'Why don't you defend yourself?' did right to reply, 'The time
is not yet.' 'Why, when is the time?' 'When I see someone else calumniated.'
For men become calm when they have spent their anger on somebody else.
This happened in the case of Ergophilus: though the people were more
irritated against him than against Callisthenes, they acquitted him
because they had condemned Callisthenes to death the day before. Again,
men become calm if they have convicted the offender; or if he has
already suffered worse things than they in their anger would have
themselves inflicted upon him; for they feel as if they were already
avenged. Or if they feel that they themselves are in the wrong and
are suffering justly (for anger is not excited by what is just), since
men no longer think then that they are suffering without justification;
and anger, as we have seen, means this. Hence we ought always to inflict
a preliminary punishment in words: if that is done, even slaves are
less aggrieved by the actual punishment. We also feel calm if we think
that the offender will not see that he is punished on our account
and because of the way he has treated us. For anger has to do with
individuals. This is plain from the definition. Hence the poet has
well written: 

"Say that it was Odysseus, sacker of cities, "

implying that Odysseus would not have considered himself avenged
unless the Cyclops perceived both by whom and for what he had been
blinded. Consequently we do not get angry with any one who cannot
be aware of our anger, and in particular we cease to be angry with
people once they are dead, for we feel that the worst has been done
to them, and that they will neither feel pain nor anything else that
we in our anger aim at making them feel. And therefore the poet has
well made Apollo say, in order to put a stop to the anger of Achilles
against the dead Hector, 

"For behold in his fury he doeth despite to the senseless clay.
"

It is now plain that when you wish to calm others you must draw upon
these lines of argument; you must put your hearers into the corresponding
frame of mind, and represent those with whom they are angry as formidable,
or as worthy of reverence, or as benefactors, or as involuntary agents,
or as much distressed at what they have done. 

Part 4

Let us now turn to Friendship and Enmity, and ask towards whom these
feelings are entertained, and why. We will begin by defining and friendly
feeling. We may describe friendly feeling towards any one as wishing
for him what you believe to be good things, not for your own sake
but for his, and being inclined, so far as you can, to bring these
things about. A friend is one who feels thus and excites these feelings
in return: those who think they feel thus towards each other think
themselves friends. This being assumed, it follows that your friend
is the sort of man who shares your pleasure in what is good and your
pain in what is unpleasant, for your sake and for no other reason.
This pleasure and pain of his will be the token of his good wishes
for you, since we all feel glad at getting what we wish for, and pained
at getting what we do not. Those, then, are friends to whom the same
things are good and evil; and those who are, moreover, friendly or
unfriendly to the same people; for in that case they must have the
same wishes, and thus by wishing for each other what they wish for
themselves, they show themselves each other's friends. Again, we feel
friendly to those who have treated us well, either ourselves or those
we care for, whether on a large scale, or readily, or at some particular
crisis; provided it was for our own sake. And also to those who we
think wish to treat us well. And also to our friends' friends, and
to those who like, or are liked by, those whom we like ourselves.
And also to those who are enemies to those whose enemies we are, and
dislike, or are disliked by, those whom we dislike. For all such persons
think the things good which we think good, so that they wish what
is good for us; and this, as we saw, is what friends must do. And
also to those who are willing to treat us well where money or our
personal safety is concerned: and therefore we value those who are
liberal, brave, or just. The just we consider to be those who do not
live on others; which means those who work for their living, especially
farmers and others who work with their own hands. We also like temperate
men, because they are not unjust to others; and, for the same reason,
those who mind their own business. And also those whose friends we
wish to be, if it is plain that they wish to be our friends: such
are the morally good, and those well thought of by every one, by the
best men, or by those whom we admire or who admire us. And also those
with whom it is pleasant to live and spend our days: such are the
good-tempered, and those who are not too ready to show us our mistakes,
and those who are not cantankerous or quarrelsome-such people are
always wanting to fight us, and those who fight us we feel wish for
the opposite of what we wish for ourselves-and those who have the
tact to make and take a joke; here both parties have the same object
in view, when they can stand being made fun of as well as do it prettily
themselves. And we also feel friendly towards those who praise such
good qualities as we possess, and especially if they praise the good
qualities that we are not too sure we do possess. And towards those
who are cleanly in their person, their dress, and all their way of
life. And towards those who do not reproach us with what we have done
amiss to them or they have done to help us, for both actions show
a tendency to criticize us. And towards those who do not nurse grudges
or store up grievances, but are always ready to make friends again;
for we take it that they will behave to us just as we find them behaving
to every one else. And towards those who are not evil speakers and
who are aware of neither their neighbours' bad points nor our own,
but of our good ones only, as a good man always will be. And towards
those who do not try to thwart us when we are angry or in earnest,
which would mean being ready to fight us. And towards those who have
some serious feeling towards us, such as admiration for us, or belief
in our goodness, or pleasure in our company; especially if they feel
like this about qualities in us for which we especially wish to be
admired, esteemed, or liked. And towards those who are like ourselves
in character and occupation, provided they do not get in our way or
gain their living from the same source as we do-for then it will be
a case of 'potter against potter': 

"Potter to potter and builder to builder begrudge their reward.
"

And those who desire the same things as we desire, if it is possible
for us both to share them together; otherwise the same trouble arises
here too. And towards those with whom we are on such terms that, while
we respect their opinions, we need not blush before them for doing
what is conventionally wrong: as well as towards those before whom
we should be ashamed to do anything really wrong. Again, our rivals,
and those whom we should like to envy us--though without ill-feeling--either
we like these people or at least we wish them to like us. And we feel
friendly towards those whom we help to secure good for themselves,
provided we are not likely to suffer heavily by it ourselves. And
those who feel as friendly to us when we are not with them as when
we are-which is why all men feel friendly towards those who are faithful
to their dead friends. And, speaking generally, towards those who
are really fond of their friends and do not desert them in trouble;
of all good men, we feel most friendly to those who show their goodness
as friends. Also towards those who are honest with us, including those
who will tell us of their own weak points: it has just said that with
our friends we are not ashamed of what is conventionally wrong, and
if we do have this feeling, we do not love them; if therefore we do
not have it, it looks as if we did love them. We also like those with
whom we do not feel frightened or uncomfortable-nobody can like a
man of whom he feels frightened. Friendship has various forms-comradeship,
intimacy, kinship, and so on. 

Things that cause friendship are: doing kindnesses; doing them unasked;
and not proclaiming the fact when they are done, which shows that
they were done for our own sake and not for some other reason.

Enmity and Hatred should clearly be studied by reference to their
opposites. Enmity may be produced by anger or spite or calumny. Now
whereas anger arises from offences against oneself, enmity may arise
even without that; we may hate people merely because of what we take
to be their character. Anger is always concerned with individuals-a
Callias or a Socrates-whereas hatred is directed also against classes:
we all hate any thief and any informer. Moreover, anger can be cured
by time; but hatred cannot. The one aims at giving pain to its object,
the other at doing him harm; the angry man wants his victims to feel;
the hater does not mind whether they feel or not. All painful things
are felt; but the greatest evils, injustice and folly, are the least
felt, since their presence causes no pain. And anger is accompanied
by pain, hatred is not; the angry man feels pain, but the hater does
not. Much may happen to make the angry man pity those who offend him,
but the hater under no circumstances wishes to pity a man whom he
has once hated: for the one would have the offenders suffer for what
they have done; the other would have them cease to exist.

It is plain from all this that we can prove people to be friends or
enemies; if they are not, we can make them out to be so; if they claim
to be so, we can refute their claim; and if it is disputed whether
an action was due to anger or to hatred, we can attribute it to whichever
of these we prefer. 

Part 5

To turn next to Fear, what follows will show things and persons of
which, and the states of mind in which, we feel afraid. Fear may be
defined as a pain or disturbance due to a mental picture of some destructive
or painful evil in the future. Of destructive or painful evils only;
for there are some evils, e.g. wickedness or stupidity, the prospect
of which does not frighten us: I mean only such as amount to great
pains or losses. And even these only if they appear not remote but
so near as to be imminent: we do not fear things that are a very long
way off: for instance, we all know we shall die, but we are not troubled
thereby, because death is not close at hand. From this definition
it will follow that fear is caused by whatever we feel has great power
of destroying or of harming us in ways that tend to cause us great
pain. Hence the very indications of such things are terrible, making
us feel that the terrible thing itself is close at hand; the approach
of what is terrible is just what we mean by 'danger'. Such indications
are the enmity and anger of people who have power to do something
to us; for it is plain that they have the will to do it, and so they
are on the point of doing it. Also injustice in possession of power;
for it is the unjust man's will to do evil that makes him unjust.
Also outraged virtue in possession of power; for it is plain that,
when outraged, it always has the will to retaliate, and now it has
the power to do so. Also fear felt by those who have the power to
do something to us, since such persons are sure to be ready to do
it. And since most men tend to be bad-slaves to greed, and cowards
in danger-it is, as a rule, a terrible thing to be at another man's
mercy; and therefore, if we have done anything horrible, those in
the secret terrify us with the thought that they may betray or desert
us. And those who can do us wrong are terrible to us when we are liable
to be wronged; for as a rule men do wrong to others whenever they
have the power to do it. And those who have been wronged, or believe
themselves to be wronged, are terrible; for they are always looking
out for their opportunity. Also those who have done people wrong,
if they possess power, since they stand in fear of retaliation: we
have already said that wickedness possessing power is terrible. Again,
our rivals for a thing cause us fear when we cannot both have it at
once; for we are always at war with such men. We also fear those who
are to be feared by stronger people than ourselves: if they can hurt
those stronger people, still more can they hurt us; and, for the same
reason, we fear those whom those stronger people are actually afraid
of. Also those who have destroyed people stronger than we are. Also
those who are attacking people weaker than we are: either they are
already formidable, or they will be so when they have thus grown stronger.
Of those we have wronged, and of our enemies or rivals, it is not
the passionate and outspoken whom we have to fear, but the quiet,
dissembling, unscrupulous; since we never know when they are upon
us, we can never be sure they are at a safe distance. All terrible
things are more terrible if they give us no chance of retrieving a
blunder either no chance at all, or only one that depends on our enemies
and not ourselves. Those things are also worse which we cannot, or
cannot easily, help. Speaking generally, anything causes us to feel
fear that when it happens to, or threatens, others cause us to feel
pity. 

The above are, roughly, the chief things that are terrible and are
feared. Let us now describe the conditions under which we ourselves
feel fear. If fear is associated with the expectation that something
destructive will happen to us, plainly nobody will be afraid who believes
nothing can happen to him; we shall not fear things that we believe
cannot happen to us, nor people who we believe cannot inflict them
upon us; nor shall we be afraid at times when we think ourselves safe
from them. It follows therefore that fear is felt by those who believe
something to be likely to happen to them, at the hands of particular
persons, in a particular form, and at a particular time. People do
not believe this when they are, or think they a are, in the midst
of great prosperity, and are in consequence insolent, contemptuous,
and reckless-the kind of character produced by wealth, physical strength,
abundance of friends, power: nor yet when they feel they have experienced
every kind of horror already and have grown callous about the future,
like men who are being flogged and are already nearly dead-if they
are to feel the anguish of uncertainty, there must be some faint expectation
of escape. This appears from the fact that fear sets us thinking what
can be done, which of course nobody does when things are hopeless.
Consequently, when it is advisable that the audience should be frightened,
the orator must make them feel that they really are in danger of something,
pointing out that it has happened to others who were stronger than
they are, and is happening, or has happened, to people like themselves,
at the hands of unexpected people, in an unexpected form, and at an
unexpected time. 

Having now seen the nature of fear, and of the things that cause it,
and the various states of mind in which it is felt, we can also see
what Confidence is, about what things we feel it, and under what conditions.
It is the opposite of fear, and what causes it is the opposite of
what causes fear; it is, therefore, the expectation associated with
a mental picture of the nearness of what keeps us safe and the absence
or remoteness of what is terrible: it may be due either to the near
presence of what inspires confidence or to the absence of what causes
alarm. We feel it if we can take steps-many, or important, or both-to
cure or prevent trouble; if we have neither wronged others nor been
wronged by them; if we have either no rivals at all or no strong ones;
if our rivals who are strong are our friends or have treated us well
or been treated well by us; or if those whose interest is the same
as ours are the more numerous party, or the stronger, or both.

As for our own state of mind, we feel confidence if we believe we
have often succeeded and never suffered reverses, or have often met
danger and escaped it safely. For there are two reasons why human
beings face danger calmly: they may have no experience of it, or they
may have means to deal with it: thus when in danger at sea people
may feel confident about what will happen either because they have
no experience of bad weather, or because their experience gives them
the means of dealing with it. We also feel confident whenever there
is nothing to terrify other people like ourselves, or people weaker
than ourselves, or people than whom we believe ourselves to be stronger-and
we believe this if we have conquered them, or conquered others who
are as strong as they are, or stronger. Also if we believe ourselves
superior to our rivals in the number and importance of the advantages
that make men formidable-wealth, physical strength, strong bodies
of supporters, extensive territory, and the possession of all, or
the most important, appliances of war. Also if we have wronged no
one, or not many, or not those of whom we are afraid; and generally,
if our relations with the gods are satisfactory, as will be shown
especially by signs and oracles. The fact is that anger makes us confident-that
anger is excited by our knowledge that we are not the wrongers but
the wronged, and that the divine power is always supposed to be on
the side of the wronged. Also when, at the outset of an enterprise,
we believe that we cannot and shall not fail, or that we shall succeed
completely.-So much for the causes of fear and confidence.

Part 6

We now turn to Shame and Shamelessness; what follows will explain
the things that cause these feelings, and the persons before whom,
and the states of mind under which, they are felt. Shame may be defined
as pain or disturbance in regard to bad things, whether present, past,
or future, which seem likely to involve us in discredit; and shamelessness
as contempt or indifference in regard to these same bad things. If
this definition be granted, it follows that we feel shame at such
bad things as we think are disgraceful to ourselves or to those we
care for. These evils are, in the first place, those due to moral
badness. Such are throwing away one's shield or taking to flight;
for these bad things are due to cowardice. Also, withholding a deposit
or otherwise wronging people about money; for these acts are due to
injustice. Also, having carnal intercourse with forbidden persons,
at wrong times, or in wrong places; for these things are due to licentiousness.
Also, making profit in petty or disgraceful ways, or out of helpless
persons, e.g. the poor, or the dead-whence the proverb 'He would pick
a corpse's pocket'; for all this is due to low greed and meanness.
Also, in money matters, giving less help than you might, or none at
all, or accepting help from those worse off than yourself; so also
borrowing when it will seem like begging; begging when it will seem
like asking the return of a favour; asking such a return when it will
seem like begging; praising a man in order that it may seem like begging;
and going on begging in spite of failure: all such actions are tokens
of meanness. Also, praising people to their face, and praising extravagantly
a man's good points and glozing over his weaknesses, and showing extravagant
sympathy with his grief when you are in his presence, and all that
sort of thing; all this shows the disposition of a flatterer. Also,
refusing to endure hardships that are endured by people who are older,
more delicately brought up, of higher rank, or generally less capable
of endurance than ourselves: for all this shows effeminacy. Also,
accepting benefits, especially accepting them often, from another
man, and then abusing him for conferring them: all this shows a mean,
ignoble disposition. Also, talking incessantly about yourself, making
loud professions, and appropriating the merits of others; for this
is due to boastfulness. The same is true of the actions due to any
of the other forms of badness of moral character, of the tokens of
such badness, &c.: they are all disgraceful and shameless. Another
sort of bad thing at which we feel shame is, lacking a share in the
honourable things shared by every one else, or by all or nearly all
who are like ourselves. By 'those like ourselves' I mean those of
our own race or country or age or family, and generally those who
are on our own level. Once we are on a level with others, it is a
disgrace to be, say, less well educated than they are; and so with
other advantages: all the more so, in each case, if it is seen to
be our own fault: wherever we are ourselves to blame for our present,
past, or future circumstances, it follows at once that this is to
a greater extent due to our moral badness. We are moreover ashamed
of having done to us, having had done, or being about to have done
to us acts that involve us in dishonour and reproach; as when we surrender
our persons, or lend ourselves to vile deeds, e.g. when we submit
to outrage. And acts of yielding to the lust of others are shameful
whether willing or unwilling (yielding to force being an instance
of unwillingness), since unresisting submission to them is due to
unmanliness or cowardice. 

These things, and others like them, are what cause the feeling of
shame. Now since shame is a mental picture of disgrace, in which we
shrink from the disgrace itself and not from its consequences, and
we only care what opinion is held of us because of the people who
form that opinion, it follows that the people before whom we feel
shame are those whose opinion of us matters to us. Such persons are:
those who admire us, those whom we admire, those by whom we wish to
be admired, those with whom we are competing, and those whose opinion
of us we respect. We admire those, and wish those to admire us, who
possess any good thing that is highly esteemed; or from whom we are
very anxious to get something that they are able to give us-as a lover
feels. We compete with our equals. We respect, as true, the views
of sensible people, such as our elders and those who have been well
educated. And we feel more shame about a thing if it is done openly,
before all men's eyes. Hence the proverb, 'shame dwells in the eyes'.
For this reason we feel most shame before those who will always be
with us and those who notice what we do, since in both cases eyes
are upon us. We also feel it before those not open to the same imputation
as ourselves: for it is plain that their opinions about it are the
opposite of ours. Also before those who are hard on any one whose
conduct they think wrong; for what a man does himself, he is said
not to resent when his neighbours do it: so that of course he does
resent their doing what he does not do himself. And before those who
are likely to tell everybody about you; not telling others is as good
as not be lieving you wrong. People are likely to tell others about
you if you have wronged them, since they are on the look out to harm
you; or if they speak evil of everybody, for those who attack the
innocent will be still more ready to attack the guilty. And before
those whose main occupation is with their neighbours' failings-people
like satirists and writers of comedy; these are really a kind of evil-speakers
and tell-tales. And before those who have never yet known us come
to grief, since their attitude to us has amounted to admiration so
far: that is why we feel ashamed to refuse those a favour who ask
one for the first time-we have not as yet lost credit with them. Such
are those who are just beginning to wish to be our friends; for they
have seen our best side only (hence the appropriateness of Euripides'
reply to the Syracusans): and such also are those among our old acquaintances
who know nothing to our discredit. And we are ashamed not merely of
the actual shameful conduct mentioned, but also of the evidences of
it: not merely, for example, of actual sexual intercourse, but also
of its evidences; and not merely of disgraceful acts but also of disgraceful
talk. Similarly we feel shame not merely in presence of the persons
mentioned but also of those who will tell them what we have done,
such as their servants or friends. And, generally, we feel no shame
before those upon whose opinions we quite look down as untrustworthy
(no one feels shame before small children or animals); nor are we
ashamed of the same things before intimates as before strangers, but
before the former of what seem genuine faults, before the latter of
what seem conventional ones. 

The conditions under which we shall feel shame are these: first, having
people related to us like those before whom, as has been said, we
feel shame. These are, as was stated, persons whom we admire, or who
admire us, or by whom we wish to be admired, or from whom we desire
some service that we shall not obtain if we forfeit their good opinion.
These persons may be actually looking on (as Cydias represented them
in his speech on land assignments in Samos, when he told the Athenians
to imagine the Greeks to be standing all around them, actually seeing
the way they voted and not merely going to hear about it afterwards):
or again they may be near at hand, or may be likely to find out about
what we do. This is why in misfortune we do not wish to be seen by
those who once wished themselves like us; for such a feeling implies
admiration. And men feel shame when they have acts or exploits to
their credit on which they are bringing dishonour, whether these are
their own, or those of their ancestors, or those of other persons
with whom they have some close connexion. Generally, we feel shame
before those for whose own misconduct we should also feel it-those
already mentioned; those who take us as their models; those whose
teachers or advisers we have been; or other people, it may be, like
ourselves, whose rivals we are. For there are many things that shame
before such people makes us do or leave undone. And we feel more shame
when we are likely to be continually seen by, and go about under the
eyes of, those who know of our disgrace. Hence, when Antiphon the
poet was to be cudgelled to death by order of Dionysius, and saw those
who were to perish with him covering their faces as they went through
the gates, he said, 'Why do you cover your faces? Is it lest some
of these spectators should see you to-morrow?' 

So much for Shame; to understand Shamelessness, we need only consider
the converse cases, and plainly we shall have all we need.

Part 7

To take Kindness next: the definition of it will show us towards whom
it is felt, why, and in what frames of mind. Kindness-under the influence
of which a man is said to 'be kind' may be defined as helpfulness
towards some one in need, not in return for anything, nor for the
advantage of the helper himself, but for that of the person helped.
Kindness is great if shown to one who is in great need, or who needs
what is important and hard to get, or who needs it at an important
and difficult crisis; or if the helper is the only, the first, or
the chief person to give the help. Natural cravings constitute such
needs; and in particular cravings, accompanied by pain, for what is
not being attained. The appetites are cravings for this kind: sexual
desire, for instance, and those which arise during bodily injuries
and in dangers; for appetite is active both in danger and in pain.
Hence those who stand by us in poverty or in banishment, even if they
do not help us much, are yet really kind to us, because our need is
great and the occasion pressing; for instance, the man who gave the
mat in the Lyceum. The helpfulness must therefore meet, preferably,
just this kind of need; and failing just this kind, some other kind
as great or greater. We now see to whom, why, and under what conditions
kindness is shown; and these facts must form the basis of our arguments.
We must show that the persons helped are, or have been, in such pain
and need as has been described, and that their helpers gave, or are
giving, the kind of help described, in the kind of need described.
We can also see how to eliminate the idea of kindness and make our
opponents appear unkind: we may maintain that they are being or have
been helpful simply to promote their own interest-this, as has been
stated, is not kindness; or that their action was accidental, or was
forced upon them; or that they were not doing a favour, but merely
returning one, whether they know this or not-in either case the action
is a mere return, and is therefore not a kindness even if the doer
does not know how the case stands. In considering this subject we
must look at all the categories: an act may be an act of kindness
because (1) it is a particular thing, (2) it has a particular magnitude
or (3) quality, or (4) is done at a particular time or (5) place.
As evidence of the want of kindness, we may point out that a smaller
service had been refused to the man in need; or that the same service,
or an equal or greater one, has been given to his enemies; these facts
show that the service in question was not done for the sake of the
person helped. Or we may point out that the thing desired was worthless
and that the helper knew it: no one will admit that he is in need
of what is worthless. 

Part 8

So much for Kindness and Unkindness. Let us now consider Pity, asking
ourselves what things excite pity, and for what persons, and in what
states of our mind pity is felt. Pity may be defined as a feeling
of pain caused by the sight of some evil, destructive or painful,
which befalls one who does not deserve it, and which we might expect
to befall ourselves or some friend of ours, and moreover to befall
us soon. In order to feel pity, we must obviously be capable of supposing
that some evil may happen to us or some friend of ours, and moreover
some such evil as is stated in our definition or is more or less of
that kind. It is therefore not felt by those completely ruined, who
suppose that no further evil can befall them, since the worst has
befallen them already; nor by those who imagine themselves immensely
fortunate-their feeling is rather presumptuous insolence, for when
they think they possess all the good things of life, it is clear that
the impossibility of evil befalling them will be included, this being
one of the good things in question. Those who think evil may befall
them are such as have already had it befall them and have safely escaped
from it; elderly men, owing to their good sense and their experience;
weak men, especially men inclined to cowardice; and also educated
people, since these can take long views. Also those who have parents
living, or children, or wives; for these are our own, and the evils
mentioned above may easily befall them. And those who neither moved
by any courageous emotion such as anger or confidence (these emotions
take no account of the future), nor by a disposition to presumptuous
insolence (insolent men, too, take no account of the possibility that
something evil will happen to them), nor yet by great fear (panic-stricken
people do not feel pity, because they are taken up with what is happening
to themselves); only those feel pity who are between these two extremes.
In order to feel pity we must also believe in the goodness of at least
some people; if you think nobody good, you will believe that everybody
deserves evil fortune. And, generally, we feel pity whenever we are
in the condition of remembering that similar misfortunes have happened
to us or ours, or expecting them to happen in the future.

So much for the mental conditions under which we feel pity. What we
pity is stated clearly in the definition. All unpleasant and painful
things excite pity if they tend to destroy pain and annihilate; and
all such evils as are due to chance, if they are serious. The painful
and destructive evils are: death in its various forms, bodily injuries
and afflictions, old age, diseases, lack of food. The evils due to
chance are: friendlessness, scarcity of friends (it is a pitiful thing
to be torn away from friends and companions), deformity, weakness,
mutilation; evil coming from a source from which good ought to have
come; and the frequent repetition of such misfortunes. Also the coming
of good when the worst has happened: e.g. the arrival of the Great
King's gifts for Diopeithes after his death. Also that either no good
should have befallen a man at all, or that he should not be able to
enjoy it when it has. 

The grounds, then, on which we feel pity are these or like these.
The people we pity are: those whom we know, if only they are not very
closely related to us-in that case we feel about them as if we were
in danger ourselves. For this reason Amasis did not weep, they say,
at the sight of his son being led to death, but did weep when he saw
his friend begging: the latter sight was pitiful, the former terrible,
and the terrible is different from the pitiful; it tends to cast out
pity, and often helps to produce the opposite of pity. Again, we feel
pity when the danger is near ourselves. Also we pity those who are
like us in age, character, disposition, social standing, or birth;
for in all these cases it appears more likely that the same misfortune
may befall us also. Here too we have to remember the general principle
that what we fear for ourselves excites our pity when it happens to
others. Further, since it is when the sufferings of others are close
to us that they excite our pity (we cannot remember what disasters
happened a hundred centuries ago, nor look forward to what will happen
a hundred centuries hereafter, and therefore feel little pity, if
any, for such things): it follows that those who heighten the effect
of their words with suitable gestures, tones, dress, and dramatic
action generally, are especially successful in exciting pity: they
thus put the disasters before our eyes, and make them seem close to
us, just coming or just past. Anything that has just happened, or
is going to happen soon, is particularly piteous: so too therefore
are the tokens and the actions of sufferers-the garments and the like
of those who have already suffered; the words and the like of those
actually suffering-of those, for instance, who are on the point of
death. Most piteous of all is it when, in such times of trial, the
victims are persons of noble character: whenever they are so, our
pity is especially excited, because their innocence, as well as the
setting of their misfortunes before our eyes, makes their misfortunes
seem close to ourselves. 

Part 9

Most directly opposed to pity is the feeling called Indignation. Pain
at unmerited good fortune is, in one sense, opposite to pain at unmerited
bad fortune, and is due to the same moral qualities. Both feelings
are associated with good moral character; it is our duty both to feel
sympathy and pity for unmerited distress, and to feel indignation
at unmerited prosperity; for whatever is undeserved is unjust, and
that is why we ascribe indignation even to the gods. It might indeed
be thought that envy is similarly opposed to pity, on the ground that
envy it closely akin to indignation, or even the same thing. But it
is not the same. It is true that it also is a disturbing pain excited
by the prosperity of others. But it is excited not by the prosperity
of the undeserving but by that of people who are like us or equal
with us. The two feelings have this in common, that they must be due
not to some untoward thing being likely to befall ourselves, but only
to what is happening to our neighbour. The feeling ceases to be envy
in the one case and indignation in the other, and becomes fear, if
the pain and disturbance are due to the prospect of something bad
for ourselves as the result of the other man's good fortune. The feelings
of pity and indignation will obviously be attended by the converse
feelings of satisfaction. If you are pained by the unmerited distress
of others, you will be pleased, or at least not pained, by their merited
distress. Thus no good man can be pained by the punishment of parricides
or murderers. These are things we are bound to rejoice at, as we must
at the prosperity of the deserving; both these things are just, and
both give pleasure to any honest man, since he cannot help expecting
that what has happened to a man like him will happen to him too. All
these feelings are associated with the same type of moral character.
And their contraries are associated with the contrary type; the man
who is delighted by others' misfortunes is identical with the man
who envies others' prosperity. For any one who is pained by the occurrence
or existence of a given thing must be pleased by that thing's non-existence
or destruction. We can now see that all these feelings tend to prevent
pity (though they differ among themselves, for the reasons given),
so that all are equally useful for neutralizing an appeal to pity.

We will first consider Indignation-reserving the other emotions for
subsequent discussion-and ask with whom, on what grounds, and in what
states of mind we may be indignant. These questions are really answered
by what has been said already. Indignation is pain caused by the sight
of undeserved good fortune. It is, then, plain to begin with that
there are some forms of good the sight of which cannot cause it. Thus
a man may be just or brave, or acquire moral goodness: but we shall
not be indignant with him for that reason, any more than we shall
pity him for the contrary reason. Indignation is roused by the sight
of wealth, power, and the like-by all those things, roughly speaking,
which are deserved by good men and by those who possess the goods
of nature-noble birth, beauty, and so on. Again, what is long established
seems akin to what exists by nature; and therefore we feel more indignation
at those possessing a given good if they have as a matter of fact
only just got it and the prosperity it brings with it. The newly rich
give more offence than those whose wealth is of long standing and
inherited. The same is true of those who have office or power, plenty
of friends, a fine family, &c. We feel the same when these advantages
of theirs secure them others. For here again, the newly rich give
us more offence by obtaining office through their riches than do those
whose wealth is of long standing; and so in all other cases. The reason
is that what the latter have is felt to be really their own, but what
the others have is not; what appears to have been always what it is
is regarded as real, and so the possessions of the newly rich do not
seem to be really their own. Further, it is not any and every man
that deserves any given kind of good; there is a certain correspondence
and appropriateness in such things; thus it is appropriate for brave
men, not for just men, to have fine weapons, and for men of family,
not for parvenus, to make distinguished marriages. Indignation may
therefore properly be felt when any one gets what is not appropriate
for him, though he may be a good man enough. It may also be felt when
any one sets himself up against his superior, especially against his
superior in some particular respect-whence the lines 

"Only from battle he shrank with Aias Telamon's son; 

"Zeus had been angered with him, 

"had he fought with a mightier one; "

but also, even apart from that, when the inferior in any sense contends
with his superior; a musician, for instance, with a just man, for
justice is a finer thing than music. 

Enough has been said to make clear the grounds on which, and the persons
against whom, Indignation is felt-they are those mentioned, and others
like him. As for the people who feel it; we feel it if we do ourselves
deserve the greatest possible goods and moreover have them, for it
is an injustice that those who are not our equals should have been
held to deserve as much as we have. Or, secondly, we feel it if we
are really good and honest people; our judgement is then sound, and
we loathe any kind of injustice. Also if we are ambitious and eager
to gain particular ends, especially if we are ambitious for what others
are getting without deserving to get it. And, generally, if we think
that we ourselves deserve a thing and that others do not, we are disposed
to be indignant with those others so far as that thing is concerned.
Hence servile, worthless, unambitious persons are not inclined to
Indignation, since there is nothing they can believe themselves to
deserve. 

From all this it is plain what sort of men those are at whose misfortunes,
distresses, or failures we ought to feel pleased, or at least not
pained: by considering the facts described we see at once what their
contraries are. If therefore our speech puts the judges in such a
frame of mind as that indicated and shows that those who claim pity
on certain definite grounds do not deserve to secure pity but do deserve
not to secure it, it will be impossible for the judges to feel pity.

Part 10

To take Envy next: we can see on what grounds, against what persons,
and in what states of mind we feel it. Envy is pain at the sight of
such good fortune as consists of the good things already mentioned;
we feel it towards our equals; not with the idea of getting something
for ourselves, but because the other people have it. We shall feel
it if we have, or think we have, equals; and by 'equals' I mean equals
in birth, relationship, age, disposition, distinction, or wealth.
We feel envy also if we fall but a little short of having everything;
which is why people in high place and prosperity feel it-they think
every one else is taking what belongs to themselves. Also if we are
exceptionally distinguished for some particular thing, and especially
if that thing is wisdom or good fortune. Ambitious men are more envious
than those who are not. So also those who profess wisdom; they are
ambitious to be thought wise. Indeed, generally, those who aim at
a reputation for anything are envious on this particular point. And
small-minded men are envious, for everything seems great to them.
The good things which excite envy have already been mentioned. The
deeds or possessions which arouse the love of reputation and honour
and the desire for fame, and the various gifts of fortune, are almost
all subject to envy; and particularly if we desire the thing ourselves,
or think we are entitled to it, or if having it puts us a little above
others, or not having it a little below them. It is clear also what
kind of people we envy; that was included in what has been said already:
we envy those who are near us in time, place, age, or reputation.
Hence the line: 

"Ay, kin can even be jealous of their kin. "

Also our fellow-competitors, who are indeed the people just mentioned-we
do not compete with men who lived a hundred centuries ago, or those
not yet born, or the dead, or those who dwell near the Pillars of
Hercules, or those whom, in our opinion or that of others, we take
to be far below us or far above us. So too we compete with those who
follow the same ends as ourselves: we compete with our rivals in sport
or in love, and generally with those who are after the same things;
and it is therefore these whom we are bound to envy beyond all others.
Hence the saying: 

"Potter against potter. "

We also envy those whose possession of or success in a thing is a
reproach to us: these are our neighbours and equals; for it is clear
that it is our own fault we have missed the good thing in question;
this annoys us, and excites envy in us. We also envy those who have
what we ought to have, or have got what we did have once. Hence old
men envy younger men, and those who have spent much envy those who
have spent little on the same thing. And men who have not got a thing,
or not got it yet, envy those who have got it quickly. We can also
see what things and what persons give pleasure to envious people,
and in what states of mind they feel it: the states of mind in which
they feel pain are those under which they will feel pleasure in the
contrary things. If therefore we ourselves with whom the decision
rests are put into an envious state of mind, and those for whom our
pity, or the award of something desirable, is claimed are such as
have been described, it is obvious that they will win no pity from
us. 

Part 11

We will next consider Emulation, showing in what follows its causes
and objects, and the state of mind in which it is felt. Emulation
is pain caused by seeing the presence, in persons whose nature is
like our own, of good things that are highly valued and are possible
for ourselves to acquire; but it is felt not because others have these
goods, but because we have not got them ourselves. It is therefore
a good feeling felt by good persons, whereas envy is a bad feeling
felt by bad persons. Emulation makes us take steps to secure the good
things in question, envy makes us take steps to stop our neighbour
having them. Emulation must therefore tend to be felt by persons who
believe themselves to deserve certain good things that they have not
got, it being understood that no one aspires to things which appear
impossible. It is accordingly felt by the young and by persons of
lofty disposition. Also by those who possess such good things as are
deserved by men held in honour-these are wealth, abundance of friends,
public office, and the like; on the assumption that they ought to
be good men, they are emulous to gain such goods because they ought,
in their belief, to belong to men whose state of mind is good. Also
by those whom all others think deserving. We also feel it about anything
for which our ancestors, relatives, personal friends, race, or country
are specially honoured, looking upon that thing as really our own,
and therefore feeling that we deserve to have it. Further, since all
good things that are highly honoured are objects of emulation, moral
goodness in its various forms must be such an object, and also all
those good things that are useful and serviceable to others: for men
honour those who are morally good, and also those who do them service.
So with those good things our possession of which can give enjoyment
to our neighbours-wealth and beauty rather than health. We can see,
too, what persons are the objects of the feeling. They are those who
have these and similar things-those already mentioned, as courage,
wisdom, public office. Holders of public office-generals, orators,
and all who possess such powers-can do many people a good turn. Also
those whom many people wish to be like; those who have many acquaintances
or friends; those whom admire, or whom we ourselves admire; and those
who have been praised and eulogized by poets or prose-writers. Persons
of the contrary sort are objects of contempt: for the feeling and
notion of contempt are opposite to those of emulation. Those who are
such as to emulate or be emulated by others are inevitably disposed
to be contemptuous of all such persons as are subject to those bad
things which are contrary to the good things that are the objects
of emulation: despising them for just that reason. Hence we often
despise the fortunate, when luck comes to them without their having
those good things which are held in honour. 

This completes our discussion of the means by which the several emotions
may be produced or dissipated, and upon which depend the persuasive
arguments connected with the emotions. 

Part 12

Let us now consider the various types of human character, in relation
to the emotions and moral qualities, showing how they correspond to
our various ages and fortunes. By emotions I mean anger, desire, and
the like; these we have discussed already. By moral qualities I mean
virtues and vices; these also have been discussed already, as well
as the various things that various types of men tend to will and to
do. By ages I mean youth, the prime of life, and old age. By fortune
I mean birth, wealth, power, and their opposites-in fact, good fortune
and ill fortune. 

To begin with the Youthful type of character. Young men have strong
passions, and tend to gratify them indiscriminately. Of the bodily
desires, it is the sexual by which they are most swayed and in which
they show absence of self-control. They are changeable and fickle
in their desires, which are violent while they last, but quickly over:
their impulses are keen but not deep-rooted, and are like sick people's
attacks of hunger and thirst. They are hot-tempered, and quick-tempered,
and apt to give way to their anger; bad temper often gets the better
of them, for owing to their love of honour they cannot bear being
slighted, and are indignant if they imagine themselves unfairly treated.
While they love honour, they love victory still more; for youth is
eager for superiority over others, and victory is one form of this.
They love both more than they love money, which indeed they love very
little, not having yet learnt what it means to be without it-this
is the point of Pittacus' remark about Amphiaraus. They look at the
good side rather than the bad, not having yet witnessed many instances
of wickedness. They trust others readily, because they have not yet
often been cheated. They are sanguine; nature warms their blood as
though with excess of wine; and besides that, they have as yet met
with few disappointments. Their lives are mainly spent not in memory
but in expectation; for expectation refers to the future, memory to
the past, and youth has a long future before it and a short past behind
it: on the first day of one's life one has nothing at all to remember,
and can only look forward. They are easily cheated, owing to the sanguine
disposition just mentioned. Their hot tempers and hopeful dispositions
make them more courageous than older men are; the hot temper prevents
fear, and the hopeful disposition creates confidence; we cannot feel
fear so long as we are feeling angry, and any expectation of good
makes us confident. They are shy, accepting the rules of society in
which they have been trained, and not yet believing in any other standard
of honour. They have exalted notions, because they have not yet been
humbled by life or learnt its necessary limitations; moreover, their
hopeful disposition makes them think themselves equal to great things-and
that means having exalted notions. They would always rather do noble
deeds than useful ones: their lives are regulated more by moral feeling
than by reasoning; and whereas reasoning leads us to choose what is
useful, moral goodness leads us to choose what is noble. They are
fonder of their friends, intimates, and companions than older men
are, because they like spending their days in the company of others,
and have not yet come to value either their friends or anything else
by their usefulness to themselves. All their mistakes are in the direction
of doing things excessively and vehemently. They disobey Chilon's
precept by overdoing everything, they love too much and hate too much,
and the same thing with everything else. They think they know everything,
and are always quite sure about it; this, in fact, is why they overdo
everything. If they do wrong to others, it is because they mean to
insult them, not to do them actual harm. They are ready to pity others,
because they think every one an honest man, or anyhow better than
he is: they judge their neighbour by their own harmless natures, and
so cannot think he deserves to be treated in that way. They are fond
of fun and therefore witty, wit being well-bred insolence.

Part 13

Such, then is the character of the Young. The character of Elderly
Men-men who are past their prime-may be said to be formed for the
most part of elements that are the contrary of all these. They have
lived many years; they have often been taken in, and often made mistakes;
and life on the whole is a bad business. The result is that they are
sure about nothing and under-do everything. They 'think', but they
never 'know'; and because of their hesitation they always add a 'possibly'or
a 'perhaps', putting everything this way and nothing positively. They
are cynical; that is, they tend to put the worse construction on everything.
Further, their experience makes them distrustful and therefore suspicious
of evil. Consequently they neither love warmly nor hate bitterly,
but following the hint of Bias they love as though they will some
day hate and hate as though they will some day love. They are small-minded,
because they have been humbled by life: their desires are set upon
nothing more exalted or unusual than what will help them to keep alive.
They are not generous, because money is one of the things they must
have, and at the same time their experience has taught them how hard
it is to get and how easy to lose. They are cowardly, and are always
anticipating danger; unlike that of the young, who are warm-blooded,
their temperament is chilly; old age has paved the way for cowardice;
fear is, in fact, a form of chill. They love life; and all the more
when their last day has come, because the object of all desire is
something we have not got, and also because we desire most strongly
that which we need most urgently. They are too fond of themselves;
this is one form that small-mindedness takes. Because of this, they
guide their lives too much by considerations of what is useful and
too little by what is noble-for the useful is what is good for oneself,
and the noble what is good absolutely. They are not shy, but shameless
rather; caring less for what is noble than for what is useful, they
feel contempt for what people may think of them. They lack confidence
in the future; partly through experience-for most things go wrong,
or anyhow turn out worse than one expects; and partly because of their
cowardice. They live by memory rather than by hope; for what is left
to them of life is but little as compared with the long past; and
hope is of the future, memory of the past. This, again, is the cause
of their loquacity; they are continually talking of the past, because
they enjoy remembering it. Their fits of anger are sudden but feeble.
Their sensual passions have either altogether gone or have lost their
vigour: consequently they do not feel their passions much, and their
actions are inspired less by what they do feel than by the love of
gain. Hence men at this time of life are often supposed to have a
self-controlled character; the fact is that their passions have slackened,
and they are slaves to the love of gain. They guide their lives by
reasoning more than by moral feeling; reasoning being directed to
utility and moral feeling to moral goodness. If they wrong others,
they mean to injure them, not to insult them. Old men may feel pity,
as well as young men, but not for the same reason. Young men feel
it out of kindness; old men out of weakness, imagining that anything
that befalls any one else might easily happen to them, which, as we
saw, is a thought that excites pity. Hence they are querulous, and
not disposed to jesting or laughter-the love of laughter being the
very opposite of querulousness. 

Such are the characters of Young Men and Elderly Men. People always
think well of speeches adapted to, and reflecting, their own character:
and we can now see how to compose our speeches so as to adapt both
them and ourselves to our audiences. 

Part 14

As for Men in their Prime, clearly we shall find that they have a
character between that of the young and that of the old, free from
the extremes of either. They have neither that excess of confidence
which amounts to rashness, nor too much timidity, but the right amount
of each. They neither trust everybody nor distrust everybody, but
judge people correctly. Their lives will be guided not by the sole
consideration either of what is noble or of what is useful, but by
both; neither by parsimony nor by prodigality, but by what is fit
and proper. So, too, in regard to anger and desire; they will be brave
as well as temperate, and temperate as well as brave; these virtues
are divided between the young and the old; the young are brave but
intemperate, the old temperate but cowardly. To put it generally,
all the valuable qualities that youth and age divide between them
are united in the prime of life, while all their excesses or defects
are replaced by moderation and fitness. The body is in its prime from
thirty to five-and-thirty; the mind about forty-nine. 

Part 15

So much for the types of character that distinguish youth, old age,
and the prime of life. We will now turn to those Gifts of Fortune
by which human character is affected. First let us consider Good Birth.
Its effect on character is to make those who have it more ambitious;
it is the way of all men who have something to start with to add to
the pile, and good birth implies ancestral distinction. The well-born
man will look down even on those who are as good as his own ancestors,
because any far-off distinction is greater than the same thing close
to us, and better to boast about. Being well-born, which means coming
of a fine stock, must be distinguished from nobility, which means
being true to the family nature-a quality not usually found in the
well-born, most of whom are poor creatures. In the generations of
men as in the fruits of the earth, there is a varying yield; now and
then, where the stock is good, exceptional men are produced for a
while, and then decadence sets in. A clever stock will degenerate
towards the insane type of character, like the descendants of Alcibiades
or of the elder Dionysius; a steady stock towards the fatuous and
torpid type, like the descendants of Cimon, Pericles, and Socrates.

Part 16

The type of character produced by Wealth lies on the surface for all
to see. Wealthy men are insolent and arrogant; their possession of
wealth affects their understanding; they feel as if they had every
good thing that exists; wealth becomes a sort of standard of value
for everything else, and therefore they imagine there is nothing it
cannot buy. They are luxurious and ostentatious; luxurious, because
of the luxury in which they live and the prosperity which they display;
ostentatious and vulgar, because, like other people's, their minds
are regularly occupied with the object of their love and admiration,
and also because they think that other people's idea of happiness
is the same as their own. It is indeed quite natural that they should
be affected thus; for if you have money, there are always plenty of
people who come begging from you. Hence the saying of Simonides about
wise men and rich men, in answer to Hiero's wife, who asked him whether
it was better to grow rich or wise. 'Why, rich,' he said; 'for I see
the wise men spending their days at the rich men's doors.' Rich men
also consider themselves worthy to hold public office; for they consider
they already have the things that give a claim to office. In a word,
the type of character produced by wealth is that of a prosperous fool.
There is indeed one difference between the type of the newly-enriched
and those who have long been rich: the newly-enriched have all the
bad qualities mentioned in an exaggerated and worse form--to be newly-enriched
means, so to speak, no education in riches. The wrongs they do others
are not meant to injure their victims, but spring from insolence or
self-indulgence, e.g. those that end in assault or in adultery.

Part 17

As to Power: here too it may fairly be said that the type of character
it produces is mostly obvious enough. Some elements in this type it
shares with the wealthy type, others are better. Those in power are
more ambitious and more manly in character than the wealthy, because
they aspire to do the great deeds that their power permits them to
do. Responsibility makes them more serious: they have to keep paying
attention to the duties their position involves. They are dignified
rather than arrogant, for the respect in which they are held inspires
them with dignity and therefore with moderation-dignity being a mild
and becoming form of arrogance. If they wrong others, they wrong them
not on a small but on a great scale. 

Good fortune in certain of its branches produces the types of character
belonging to the conditions just described, since these conditions
are in fact more or less the kinds of good fortune that are regarded
as most important. It may be added that good fortune leads us to gain
all we can in the way of family happiness and bodily advantages. It
does indeed make men more supercilious and more reckless; but there
is one excellent quality that goes with it-piety, and respect for
the divine power, in which they believe because of events which are
really the result of chance. 

This account of the types of character that correspond to differences
of age or fortune may end here; for to arrive at the opposite types
to those described, namely, those of the poor, the unfortunate, and
the powerless, we have only to ask what the opposite qualities are.

Part 18

The use of persuasive speech is to lead to decisions. (When we know
a thing, and have decided about it, there is no further use in speaking
about it.) This is so even if one is addressing a single person and
urging him to do or not to do something, as when we scold a man for
his conduct or try to change his views: the single person is as much
your 'judge' as if he were one of many; we may say, without qualification,
that any one is your judge whom you have to persuade. Nor does it
matter whether we are arguing against an actual opponent or against
a mere proposition; in the latter case we still have to use speech
and overthrow the opposing arguments, and we attack these as we should
attack an actual opponent. Our principle holds good of ceremonial
speeches also; the 'onlookers' for whom such a speech is put together
are treated as the judges of it. Broadly speaking, however, the only
sort of person who can strictly be called a judge is the man who decides
the issue in some matter of public controversy; that is, in law suits
and in political debates, in both of which there are issues to be
decided. In the section on political oratory an account has already
been given of the types of character that mark the different constitutions.

The manner and means of investing speeches with moral character may
now be regarded as fully set forth. 

Each of the main divisions of oratory has, we have seen, its own distinct
purpose. With regard to each division, we have noted the accepted
views and propositions upon which we may base our arguments-for political,
for ceremonial, and for forensic speaking. We have further determined
completely by what means speeches may be invested with the required
moral character. We are now to proceed to discuss the arguments common
to all oratory. All orators, besides their special lines of argument,
are bound to use, for instance, the topic of the Possible and Impossible;
and to try to show that a thing has happened, or will happen in future.
Again, the topic of Size is common to all oratory; all of us have
to argue that things are bigger or smaller than they seem, whether
we are making political speeches, speeches of eulogy or attack, or
prosecuting or defending in the law-courts. Having analysed these
subjects, we will try to say what we can about the general principles
of arguing by 'enthymeme' and 'example', by the addition of which
we may hope to complete the project with which we set out. Of the
above-mentioned general lines of argument, that concerned with Amplification
is-as has been already said-most appropriate to ceremonial speeches;
that concerned with the Past, to forensic speeches, where the required
decision is always about the past; that concerned with Possibility
and the Future, to political speeches. 

Part 19

Let us first speak of the Possible and Impossible. It may plausibly
be argued: That if it is possible for one of a pair of contraries
to be or happen, then it is possible for the other: e.g. if a man
can be cured, he can also fall ill; for any two contraries are equally
possible, in so far as they are contraries. That if of two similar
things one is possible, so is the other. That if the harder of two
things is possible, so is the easier. That if a thing can come into
existence in a good and beautiful form, then it can come into existence
generally; thus a house can exist more easily than a beautiful house.
That if the beginning of a thing can occur, so can the end; for nothing
impossible occurs or begins to occur; thus the commensurability of
the diagonal of a square with its side neither occurs nor can begin
to occur. That if the end is possible, so is the beginning; for all
things that occur have a beginning. That if that which is posterior
in essence or in order of generation can come into being, so can that
which is prior: thus if a man can come into being, so can a boy, since
the boy comes first in order of generation; and if a boy can, so can
a man, for the man also is first. That those things are possible of
which the love or desire is natural; for no one, as a rule, loves
or desires impossibilities. That things which are the object of any
kind of science or art are possible and exist or come into existence.
That anything is possible the first step in whose production depends
on men or things which we can compel or persuade to produce it, by
our greater strength, our control of them, or our friendship with
them. That where the parts are possible, the whole is possible; and
where the whole is possible, the parts are usually possible. For if
the slit in front, the toe-piece, and the upper leather can be made,
then shoes can be made; and if shoes, then also the front slit and
toe-piece. That if a whole genus is a thing that can occur, so can
the species; and if the species can occur, so can the genus: thus,
if a sailing vessel can be made, so also can a trireme; and if a trireme,
then a sailing vessel also. That if one of two things whose existence
depends on each other is possible, so is the other; for instance,
if 'double', then 'half', and if 'half', then 'double'. That if a
thing can be produced without art or preparation, it can be produced
still more certainly by the careful application of art to it. Hence
Agathon has said: 

"To some things we by art must needs attain, 

"Others by destiny or luck we gain. "

That if anything is possible to inferior, weaker, and stupider people,
it is more so for their opposites; thus Isocrates said that it would
be a strange thing if he could not discover a thing that Euthynus
had found out. As for Impossibility, we can clearly get what we want
by taking the contraries of the arguments stated above. 

Questions of Past Fact may be looked at in the following ways: First,
that if the less likely of two things has occurred, the more likely
must have occurred also. That if one thing that usually follows another
has happened, then that other thing has happened; that, for instance,
if a man has forgotten a thing, he has also once learnt it. That if
a man had the power and the wish to do a thing, he has done it; for
every one does do whatever he intends to do whenever he can do it,
there being nothing to stop him. That, further, he has done the thing
in question either if he intended it and nothing external prevented
him; or if he had the power to do it and was angry at the time; or
if he had the power to do it and his heart was set upon it-for people
as a rule do what they long to do, if they can; bad people through
lack of self-control; good people, because their hearts are set upon
good things. Again, that if a thing was 'going to happen', it has
happened; if a man was 'going to do something', he has done it, for
it is likely that the intention was carried out. That if one thing
has happened which naturally happens before another or with a view
to it, the other has happened; for instance, if it has lightened,
it has also thundered; and if an action has been attempted, it has
been done. That if one thing has happened which naturally happens
after another, or with a view to which that other happens, then that
other (that which happens first, or happens with a view to this thing)
has also happened; thus, if it has thundered it has lightened, and
if an action has been done it has been attempted. Of all these sequences
some are inevitable and some merely usual. The arguments for the non-occurrence
of anything can obviously be found by considering the opposites of
those that have been mentioned. 

How questions of Future Fact should be argued is clear from the same
considerations: That a thing will be done if there is both the power
and the wish to do it; or if along with the power to do it there is
a craving for the result, or anger, or calculation, prompting it.
That the thing will be done, in these cases, if the man is actually
setting about it, or even if he means to do it later-for usually what
we mean to do happens rather than what we do not mean to do. That
a thing will happen if another thing which naturally happens before
it has already happened; thus, if it is clouding over, it is likely
to rain. That if the means to an end have occurred, then the end is
likely to occur; thus, if there is a foundation, there will be a house.

For arguments about the Greatness and Smallness of things, the greater
and the lesser, and generally great things and small, what we have
already said will show the line to take. In discussing deliberative
oratory we have spoken about the relative greatness of various goods,
and about the greater and lesser in general. Since therefore in each
type oratory the object under discussion is some kind of good-whether
it is utility, nobleness, or justice-it is clear that every orator
must obtain the materials of amplification through these channels.
To go further than this, and try to establish abstract laws of greatness
and superiority, is to argue without an object; in practical life,
particular facts count more than generalizations. 

Enough has now been said about these questions of possibility and
the reverse, of past or future fact, and of the relative greatness
or smallness of things. 

Part 20

The special forms of oratorical argument having now been discussed,
we have next to treat of those which are common to all kinds of oratory.
These are of two main kinds, 'Example' and 'Enthymeme'; for the 'Maxim'
is part of an enthymeme. 

We will first treat of argument by Example, for it has the nature
of induction, which is the foundation of reasoning. This form of argument
has two varieties; one consisting in the mention of actual past facts,
the other in the invention of facts by the speaker. Of the latter,
again, there are two varieties, the illustrative parallel and the
fable (e.g. the fables of Aesop, those from Libya). As an instance
of the mention of actual facts, take the following. The speaker may
argue thus: 'We must prepare for war against the king of Persia and
not let him subdue Egypt. For Darius of old did not cross the Aegean
until he had seized Egypt; but once he had seized it, he did cross.
And Xerxes, again, did not attack us until he had seized Egypt; but
once he had seized it, he did cross. If therefore the present king
seizes Egypt, he also will cross, and therefore we must not let him.'

The illustrative parallel is the sort of argument Socrates used: e.g.
'Public officials ought not to be selected by lot. That is like using
the lot to select athletes, instead of choosing those who are fit
for the contest; or using the lot to select a steersman from among
a ship's crew, as if we ought to take the man on whom the lot falls,
and not the man who knows most about it.' 

Instances of the fable are that of Stesichorus about Phalaris, and
that of Aesop in defence of the popular leader. When the people of
Himera had made Phalaris military dictator, and were going to give
him a bodyguard, Stesichorus wound up a long talk by telling them
the fable of the horse who had a field all to himself. Presently there
came a stag and began to spoil his pasturage. The horse, wishing to
revenge himself on the stag, asked a man if he could help him to do
so. The man said, 'Yes, if you will let me bridle you and get on to
your back with javelins in my hand'. The horse agreed, and the man
mounted; but instead of getting his revenge on the stag, the horse
found himself the slave of the man. 'You too', said Stesichorus, 'take
care lest your desire for revenge on your enemies, you meet the same
fate as the horse. By making Phalaris military dictator, you have
already let yourselves be bridled. If you let him get on to your backs
by giving him a bodyguard, from that moment you will be his slaves.'

Aesop, defending before the assembly at Samos a poular leader who
was being tried for his life, told this story: A fox, in crossing
a river, was swept into a hole in the rocks; and, not being able to
get out, suffered miseries for a long time through the swarms of fleas
that fastened on her. A hedgehog, while roaming around, noticed the
fox; and feeling sorry for her asked if he might remove the fleas.
But the fox declined the offer; and when the hedgehog asked why, she
replied, 'These fleas are by this time full of me and not sucking
much blood; if you take them away, others will come with fresh appetites
and drink up all the blood I have left.' 'So, men of Samos', said
Aesop, 'my client will do you no further harm; he is wealthy already.
But if you put him to death, others will come along who are not rich,
and their peculations will empty your treasury completely.'

Fables are suitable for addresses to popular assemblies; and they
have one advantage-they are comparatively easy to invent, whereas
it is hard to find parallels among actual past events. You will in
fact frame them just as you frame illustrative parallels: all you
require is the power of thinking out your analogy, a power developed
by intellectual training. But while it is easier to supply parallels
by inventing fables, it is more valuable for the political speaker
to supply them by quoting what has actually happened, since in most
respects the future will be like what the past has been.

Where we are unable to argue by Enthymeme, we must try to demonstrate
our point by this method of Example, and to convince our hearers thereby.
If we can argue by Enthymeme, we should use our Examples as subsequent
supplementary evidence. They should not precede the Enthymemes: that
will give the argument an inductive air, which only rarely suits the
conditions of speech-making. If they follow the enthymemes, they have
the effect of witnesses giving evidence, and this alway tells. For
the same reason, if you put your examples first you must give a large
number of them; if you put them last, a single one is sufficient;
even a single witness will serve if he is a good one. It has now been
stated how many varieties of argument by Example there are, and how
and when they are to be employed. 

Part 21

We now turn to the use of Maxims, in order to see upon what subjects
and occasions, and for what kind of speaker, they will appropriately
form part of a speech. This will appear most clearly when we have
defined a maxim. It is a statement; not a particular fact, such as
the character of lphicrates, but of a general kind; nor is it about
any and every subject--e.g. 'straight is the contrary of curved' is
not a maxim--but only about questions of practical conduct, courses
of conduct to be chosen or avoided. Now an Enthymeme is a syllogism
dealing with such practical subjects. It is therefore roughly true
that the premisses or conclusions of Enthymemes, considered apart
from the rest of the argument, are Maxims: e.g. 

"Never should any man whose wits are sound 

"Have his sons taught more wisdom than their fellows. "

Here we have a Maxim; add the reason or explanation, and the whole
thing is an Enthymeme; thus- 

"It makes them idle; and therewith they earn 

"Ill-will and jealousy throughout the city. "

Again, 

"There is no man in all things prosperous, "

and 

"There is no man among us all is free, "

are maxims; but the latter, taken with what follows it, is an Enthymeme-

"For all are slaves of money or of chance. "

From this definition of a maxim it follows that there are four kinds
of maxims. In the first Place, the maxim may or may not have a supplement.
Proof is needed where the statement is paradoxical or disputable;
no supplement is wanted where the statement contains nothing paradoxical,
either because the view expressed is already a known truth, e.g.

"Chiefest of blessings is health for a man, as it seemeth to me,
"

this being the general opinion: or because, as soon as the view is
stated, it is clear at a glance, e.g. 

"No love is true save that which loves for ever. "

Of the Maxims that do have a supplement attached, some are part of
an Enthymeme, e.g. 

"Never should any man whose wits are sound, &c. "

Others have the essential character of Enthymemes, but are not stated
as parts of Enthymemes; these latter are reckoned the best; they are
those in which the reason for the view expressed is simply implied,
e.g. 

"O mortal man, nurse not immortal wrath. "

To say 'it is not right to nurse immortal wrath' is a maxim; the added
words 'mortal man' give the reason. Similarly, with the words Mortal
creatures ought to cherish mortal, not immortal thoughts.

What has been said has shown us how many kinds of Maxims there are,
and to what subjects the various kinds are appropriate. They must
not be given without supplement if they express disputed or paradoxical
views: we must, in that case, either put the supplement first and
make a maxim of the conclusion, e.g. you might say, 'For my part,
since both unpopularity and idleness are undesirable, I hold that
it is better not to be educated'; or you may say this first, and then
add the previous clause. Where a statement, without being paradoxical,
is not obviously true, the reason should be added as concisely as
possible. In such cases both laconic and enigmatic sayings are suitable:
thus one might say what Stesichorus said to the Locrians, 'Insolence
is better avoided, lest the cicalas chirp on the ground'.

The use of Maxims is appropriate only to elderly men, and in handling
subjects in which the speaker is experienced. For a young man to use
them is-like telling stories-unbecoming; to use them in handling things
in which one has no experience is silly and ill-bred: a fact sufficiently
proved by the special fondness of country fellows for striking out
maxims, and their readiness to air them. 

To declare a thing to be universally true when it is not is most appropriate
when working up feelings of horror and indignation in our hearers;
especially by way of preface, or after the facts have been proved.
Even hackneyed and commonplace maxims are to be used, if they suit
one's purpose: just because they are commonplace, every one seems
to agree with them, and therefore they are taken for truth. Thus,
any one who is calling on his men to risk an engagement without obtaining
favourable omens may quote 

"One omen of all is hest, that we fight for our fatherland.
"

Or, if he is calling on them to attack a stronger force-

"The War-God showeth no favour. "

Or, if he is urging people to destroy the innocent children of their
enemies- 

"Fool, who slayeth the father and leaveth his sons to avenge him.
"

Some proverbs are also maxims, e.g. the proverb 'An Attic neighbour'.
You are not to avoid uttering maxims that contradict such sayings
as have become public property (I mean such sayings as 'know thyself'
and 'nothing in excess') if doing so will raise your hearers' opinion
of your character, or convey an effect of strong emotion--e.g. an
angry speaker might well say, 'It is not true that we ought to know
ourselves: anyhow, if this man had known himself, he would never have
thought himself fit for an army command.' It will raise people's opinion
of our character to say, for instance, 'We ought not to follow the
saying that bids us treat our friends as future enemies: much better
to treat our enemies as future friends.' The moral purpose should
be implied partly by the very wording of our maxim. Failing this,
we should add our reason: e.g. having said 'We should treat our friends,
not as the saying advises, but as if they were going to be our friends
always', we should add 'for the other behaviour is that of a traitor':
or we might put it, I disapprove of that saying. A true friend will
treat his friend as if he were going to be his friend for ever'; and
again, 'Nor do I approve of the saying "nothing in excess": we are
bound to hate bad men excessively.' One great advantage of Maxims
to a speaker is due to the want of intelligence in his hearers, who
love to hear him succeed in expressing as a universal truth the opinions
which they hold themselves about particular cases. I will explain
what I mean by this, indicating at the same time how we are to hunt
down the maxims required. The maxim, as has been already said, a general
statement and people love to hear stated in general terms what they
already believe in some particular connexion: e.g. if a man happens
to have bad neighbours or bad children, he will agree with any one
who tells him, 'Nothing is more annoying than having neighbours',
or, 'Nothing is more foolish than to be the parent of children.' The
orator has therefore to guess the subjects on which his hearers really
hold views already, and what those views are, and then must express,
as general truths, these same views on these same subjects. This is
one advantage of using maxims. There is another which is more important-it
invests a speech with moral character. There is moral character in
every speech in which the moral purpose is conspicuous: and maxims
always produce this effect, because the utterance of them amounts
to a general declaration of moral principles: so that, if the maxims
are sound, they display the speaker as a man of sound moral character.
So much for the Maxim-its nature, varieties, proper use, and advantages.

Part 22

We now come to the Enthymemes, and will begin the subject with some
general consideration of the proper way of looking for them, and then
proceed to what is a distinct question, the lines of argument to be
embodied in them. It has already been pointed out that the Enthymeme
is a syllogism, and in what sense it is so. We have also noted the
differences between it and the syllogism of dialectic. Thus we must
not carry its reasoning too far back, or the length of our argument
will cause obscurity: nor must we put in all the steps that lead to
our conclusion, or we shall waste words in saying what is manifest.
It is this simplicity that makes the uneducated more effective than
the educated when addressing popular audiences-makes them, as the
poets tell us, 'charm the crowd's ears more finely'. Educated men
lay down broad general principles; uneducated men argue from common
knowledge and draw obvious conclusions. We must not, therefore, start
from any and every accepted opinion, but only from those we have defined-those
accepted by our judges or by those whose authority they recognize:
and there must, moreover, be no doubt in the minds of most, if not
all, of our judges that the opinions put forward really are of this
sort. We should also base our arguments upon probabilities as well
as upon certainties. 

The first thing we have to remember is this. Whether our argument
concerns public affairs or some other subject, we must know some,
if not all, of the facts about the subject on which we are to speak
and argue. Otherwise we can have no materials out of which to construct
arguments. I mean, for instance, how could we advise the Athenians
whether they should go to war or not, if we did not know their strength,
whether it was naval or military or both, and how great it is; what
their revenues amount to; who their friends and enemies are; what
wars, too, they have waged, and with what success; and so on? Or how
could we eulogize them if we knew nothing about the sea-fight at Salamis,
or the battle of Marathon, or what they did for the Heracleidae, or
any other facts like that? All eulogy is based upon the noble deeds--real
or imaginary--that stand to the credit of those eulogized. On the
same principle, invectives are based on facts of the opposite kind:
the orator looks to see what base deeds--real or imaginary--stand
to the discredit of those he is attacking, such as treachery to the
cause of Hellenic freedom, or the enslavement of their gallant allies
against the barbarians (Aegina, Potidaea, &c.), or any other misdeeds
of this kind that are recorded against them. So, too, in a court of
law: whether we are prosecuting or defending, we must pay attention
to the existing facts of the case. It makes no difference whether
the subject is the Lacedaemonians or the Athenians, a man or a god;
we must do the same thing. Suppose it to be Achilles whom we are to
advise, to praise or blame, to accuse or defend; here too we must
take the facts, real or imaginary; these must be our material, whether
we are to praise or blame him for the noble or base deeds he has done,
to accuse or defend him for his just or unjust treatment of others,
or to advise him about what is or is not to his interest. The same
thing applies to any subject whatever. Thus, in handling the question
whether justice is or is not a good, we must start with the real facts
about justice and goodness. We see, then, that this is the only way
in which any one ever proves anything, whether his arguments are strictly
cogent or not: not all facts can form his basis, but only those that
bear on the matter in hand: nor, plainly, can proof be effected otherwise
by means of the speech. Consequently, as appears in the Topics, we
must first of all have by us a selection of arguments about questions
that may arise and are suitable for us to handle; and then we must
try to think out arguments of the same type for special needs as they
emerge; not vaguely and indefinitely, but by keeping our eyes on the
actual facts of the subject we have to speak on, and gathering in
as many of them as we can that bear closely upon it: for the more
actual facts we have at our command, the more easily we prove our
case; and the more closely they bear on the subject, the more they
will seem to belong to that speech only instead of being commonplaces.
By 'commonplaces' I mean, for example, eulogy of Achilles because
he is a human being or a demi-god, or because he joined the expedition
against Troy: these things are true of many others, so that this kind
of eulogy applies no better to Achilles than to Diomede. The special
facts here needed are those that are true of Achilles alone; such
facts as that he slew Hector, the bravest of the Trojans, and Cycnus
the invulnerable, who prevented all the Greeks from landing, and again
that he was the youngest man who joined the expedition, and was not
bound by oath to join it, and so on. 

Here, again, we have our first principle of selection of Enthymemes-that
which refers to the lines of argument selected. We will now consider
the various elementary classes of enthymemes. (By an 'elementary class'
of enthymeme I mean the same thing as a 'line of argument'.) We will
begin, as we must begin, by observing that there are two kinds of
enthymemes. One kind proves some affirmative or negative proposition;
the other kind disproves one. The difference between the two kinds
is the same as that between syllogistic proof and disproof in dialectic.
The demonstrative enthymeme is formed by the conjunction of compatible
propositions; the refutative, by the conjunction of incompatible propositions.

We may now be said to have in our hands the lines of argument for
the various special subjects that it is useful or necessary to handle,
having selected the propositions suitable in various cases. We have,
in fact, already ascertained the lines of argument applicable to enthymemes
about good and evil, the noble and the base, justice and injustice,
and also to those about types of character, emotions, and moral qualities.
Let us now lay hold of certain facts about the whole subject, considered
from a different and more general point of view. In the course of
our discussion we will take note of the distinction between lines
of proof and lines of disproof: and also of those lines of argument
used in what seems to be enthymemes, but are not, since they do not
represent valid syllogisms. Having made all this clear, we will proceed
to classify Objections and Refutations, showing how they can be brought
to bear upon enthymemes. 

Part 23

1. One line of positive proof is based upon consideration of the opposite
of the thing in question. Observe whether that opposite has the opposite
quality. If it has not, you refute the original proposition; if it
has, you establish it. E.g. 'Temperance is beneficial; for licentiousness
is hurtful'. Or, as in the Messenian speech, 'If war is the cause
of our present troubles, peace is what we need to put things right
again'. Or- 

"For if not even evil-doers should 

"Anger us if they meant not what they did, 

"Then can we owe no gratitude to such 

"As were constrained to do the good they did us. "

Or- 

"Since in this world liars may win belief, 

"Be sure of the opposite likewise-that this world 

"Hears many a true word and believes it not. "

2. Another line of proof is got by considering some modification of
the key-word, and arguing that what can or cannot be said of the one,
can or cannot be said of the other: e.g. 'just' does not always mean
'beneficial', or 'justly' would always mean 'beneficially', whereas
it is not desirable to be justly put to death. 

3. Another line of proof is based upon correlative ideas. If it is
true that one man noble or just treatment to another, you argue that
the other must have received noble or just treatment; or that where
it is right to command obedience, it must have been right to obey
the command. Thus Diomedon, the tax-farmer, said of the taxes: 'If
it is no disgrace for you to sell them, it is no disgrace for us to
buy them'. Further, if 'well' or 'justly' is true of the person to
whom a thing is done, you argue that it is true of the doer. But it
is possible to draw a false conclusion here. It may be just that A
should be treated in a certain way, and yet not just that he should
be so treated by B. Hence you must ask yourself two distinct questions:
(1) Is it right that A should be thus treated? (2) Is it right that
B should thus treat him? and apply your results properly, according
as your answers are Yes or No. Sometimes in such a case the two answers
differ: you may quite easily have a position like that in the Alcmaeon
of Theodectes: 

"And was there none to loathe thy mother's crime? "

to which question Alcmaeon in reply says, 

"Why, there are two things to examine here. "

And when Alphesiboea asks what he means, he rejoins: 

"They judged her fit to die, not me to slay her. "

Again there is the lawsuit about Demosthenes and the men who killed
Nicanor; as they were judged to have killed him justly, it was thought
that he was killed justly. And in the case of the man who was killed
at Thebes, the judges were requested to decide whether it was unjust
that he should be killed, since if it was not, it was argued that
it could not have been unjust to kill him. 

4. Another line of proof is the 'a fortiori'. Thus it may be argued
that if even the gods are not omniscient, certainly human beings are
not. The principle here is that, if a quality does not in fact exist
where it is more likely to exist, it clearly does not exist where
it is less likely. Again, the argument that a man who strikes his
father also strikes his neighbours follows from the principle that,
if the less likely thing is true, the more likely thing is true also;
for a man is less likely to strike his father than to strike his neighbours.
The argument, then, may run thus. Or it may be urged that, if a thing
is not true where it is more likely, it is not true where it is less
likely; or that, if it is true where it is less likely, it is true
where it is more likely: according as we have to show that a thing
is or is not true. This argument might also be used in a case of parity,
as in the lines: 

"Thou hast pity for thy sire, who has lost his sons: 

"Hast none for Oeneus, whose brave son is dead? "

And, again, 'if Theseus did no wrong, neither did Paris'; or 'the
sons of Tyndareus did no wrong, neither did Paris'; or 'if Hector
did well to slay Patroclus, Paris did well to slay Achilles'. And
'if other followers of an art are not bad men, neither are philosophers'.
And 'if generals are not bad men because it often happens that they
are condemned to death, neither are sophists'. And the remark that
'if each individual among you ought to think of his own city's reputation,
you ought all to think of the reputation of Greece as a whole'.

5. Another line of argument is based on considerations of time. Thus
Iphicrates, in the case against Harmodius, said, 'if before doing
the deed I had bargained that, if I did it, I should have a statue,
you would have given me one. Will you not give me one now that I have
done the deed? You must not make promises when you are expecting a
thing to be done for you, and refuse to fulfil them when the thing
has been done.' And, again, to induce the Thebans to let Philip pass
through their territory into Attica, it was argued that 'if he had
insisted on this before he helped them against the Phocians, they
would have promised to do it. It is monstrous, therefore, that just
because he threw away his advantage then, and trusted their honour,
they should not let him pass through now'. 

6. Another line is to apply to the other speaker what he has said
against yourself. It is an excellent turn to give to a debate, as
may be seen in the Teucer. It was employed by Iphicrates in his reply
to Aristophon. 'Would you', he asked, 'take a bribe to betray the
fleet?' 'No', said Aristophon; and Iphicrates replied, 'Very good:
if you, who are Aristophon, would not betray the fleet, would I, who
am Iphicrates?' Only, it must be recognized beforehand that the other
man is more likely than you are to commit the crime in question. Otherwise
you will make yourself ridiculous; it is Aristeides who is prosecuting,
you cannot say that sort of thing to him. The purpose is to discredit
the prosecutor, who as a rule would have it appear that his character
is better than that of the defendant, a pretension which it is desirable
to upset. But the use of such an argument is in all cases ridiculous
if you are attacking others for what you do or would do yourself,
or are urging others to do what you neither do nor would do yourself.

7. Another line of proof is secured by defining your terms. Thus,
'What is the supernatural? Surely it is either a god or the work of
a god. Well, any one who believes that the work of a god exists, cannot
help also believing that gods exist.' Or take the argument of Iphicrates,
'Goodness is true nobility; neither Harmodius nor Aristogeiton had
any nobility before they did a noble deed'. He also argued that he
himself was more akin to Harmodius and Aristogeiton than his opponent
was. 'At any rate, my deeds are more akin to those of Harmodius and
Aristogeiton than yours are'. Another example may be found in the
Alexander. 'Every one will agree that by incontinent people we mean
those who are not satisfied with the enjoyment of one love.' A further
example is to be found in the reason given by Socrates for not going
to the court of Archelaus. He said that 'one is insulted by being
unable to requite benefits, as well as by being unable to requite
injuries'. All the persons mentioned define their term and get at
its essential meaning, and then use the result when reasoning on the
point at issue. 

8. Another line of argument is founded upon the various senses of
a word. Such a word is 'rightly', as has been explained in the Topics.
Another line is based upon logical division. Thus, 'All men do wrong
from one of three motives, A, B, or C: in my case A and B are out
of the question, and even the accusers do not allege C'.

10. Another line is based upon induction. Thus from the case of the
woman of Peparethus it might be argued that women everywhere can settle
correctly the facts about their children. Another example of this
occurred at Athens in the case between the orator Mantias and his
son, when the boy's mother revealed the true facts: and yet another
at Thebes, in the case between Ismenias and Stilbon, when Dodonis
proved that it was Ismenias who was the father of her son Thettaliscus,
and he was in consequence always regarded as being so. A further instance
of induction may be taken from the Law of Theodectes: 'If we do not
hand over our horses to the care of men who have mishandled other
people's horses, nor ships to those who have wrecked other people's
ships, and if this is true of everything else alike, then men who
have failed to secure other people's safety are not to be employed
to secure our own.' Another instance is the argument of Alcidamas:
'Every one honours the wise'. Thus the Parians have honoured Archilochus,
in spite of his bitter tongue; the Chians Homer, though he was not
their countryman; the Mytilenaeans Sappho, though she was a woman;
the Lacedaemonians actually made Chilon a member of their senate,
though they are the least literary of men; the Italian Greeks honoured
Pythagoras; the inhabitants of Lampsacus gave public burial to Anaxagoras,
though he was an alien, and honour him even to this day. (It may be
argued that peoples for whom philosophers legislate are always prosperous)
on the ground that the Athenians became prosperous under Solon's laws
and the Lacedaemonians under those of Lycurgus, while at Thebes no
sooner did the leading men become philosophers than the country began
to prosper. 

11. Another line of argument is founded upon some decision already
pronounced, whether on the same subject or on one like it or contrary
to it. Such a proof is most effective if every one has always decided
thus; but if not every one, then at any rate most people; or if all,
or most, wise or good men have thus decided, or the actual judges
of the present question, or those whose authority they accept, or
any one whose decision they cannot gainsay because he has complete
control over them, or those whom it is not seemly to gainsay, as the
gods, or one's father, or one's teachers. Thus Autocles said, when
attacking Mixidemides, that it was a strange thing that the Dread
Goddesses could without loss of dignity submit to the judgement of
the Areopagus, and yet Mixidemides could not. Or as Sappho said, 'Death
is an evil thing; the gods have so judged it, or they would die'.
Or again as Aristippus said in reply to Plato when he spoke somewhat
too dogmatically, as Aristippus thought: 'Well, anyhow, our friend',
meaning Socrates, 'never spoke like that'. And Hegesippus, having
previously consulted Zeus at Olympia, asked Apollo at Delphi 'whether
his opinion was the same as his father's', implying that it would
be shameful for him to contradict his father. Thus too Isocrates argued
that Helen must have been a good woman, because Theseus decided that
she was; and Paris a good man, because the goddesses chose him before
all others; and Evagoras also, says Isocrates, was good, since when
Conon met with his misfortune he betook himself to Evagoras without
trying any one else on the way. 

12. Another line of argument consists in taking separately the parts
of a subject. Such is that given in the Topics: 'What sort of motion
is the soul? for it must be this or that.' The Socrates of Theodectes
provides an example: 'What temple has he profaned? What gods recognized
by the state has he not honoured?' 

13. Since it happens that any given thing usually has both good and
bad consequences, another line of argument consists in using those
consequences as a reason for urging that a thing should or should
not be done, for prosecuting or defending any one, for eulogy or censure.
E.g. education leads both to unpopularity, which is bad, and to wisdom,
which is good. Hence you either argue, 'It is therefore not well to
be educated, since it is not well to be unpopular': or you answer,
'No, it is well to be educated, since it is well to be wise'. The
Art of Rhetoric of Callippus is made up of this line of argument,
with the addition of those of Possibility and the others of that kind
already described. 

14. Another line of argument is used when we have to urge or discourage
a course of action that may be done in either of two opposite ways,
and have to apply the method just mentioned to both. The difference
between this one and the last is that, whereas in the last any two
things are contrasted, here the things contrasted are opposites. For
instance, the priestess enjoined upon her son not to take to public
speaking: 'For', she said, 'if you say what is right, men will hate
you; if you say what is wrong, the gods will hate you.' The reply
might be, 'On the contrary, you ought to take to public speaking:
for if you say what is right the gods will love you; if you say what
is wrong, men will love you.' This amounts to the proverbial 'buying
the marsh with the salt'. It is just this situation, viz. when each
of two opposites has both a good and a bad consequence opposite respectively
to each other, that has been termed divarication. 

15. Another line of argument is this: The things people approve of
openly are not those which they approve of secretly: openly, their
chief praise is given to justice and nobleness; but in their hearts
they prefer their own advantage. Try, in face of this, to establish
the point of view which your opponent has not adopted. This is the
most effective of the forms of argument that contradict common opinion.

16. Another line is that of rational correspondence. E.g. Iphicrates,
when they were trying to compel his son, a youth under the prescribed
age, to perform one of the state duties because he was tall, said
'If you count tall boys men, you will next be voting short men boys'.
And Theodectes in his Law said, 'You make citizens of such mercenaries
as Strabax and Charidemus, as a reward of their merits; will you not
make exiles of such citizens as those who have done irreparable harm
among the mercenaries?' 

17. Another line is the argument that if two results are the same
their antecedents are also the same. For instance, it was a saying
of Xenophanes that to assert that the gods had birth is as impious
as to say that they die; the consequence of both statements is that
there is a time when the gods do not exist. This line of proof assumes
generally that the result of any given thing is always the same: e.g.
'you are going to decide not about Isocrates, but about the value
of the whole profession of philosophy.' Or, 'to give earth and water'
means slavery; or, 'to share in the Common Peace' means obeying orders.
We are to make either such assumptions or their opposite, as suits
us best. 

18. Another line of argument is based on the fact that men do not
always make the same choice on a later as on an earlier occasion,
but reverse their previous choice. E.g. the following enthymeme: 'When
we were exiles, we fought in order to return; now we have returned,
it would be strange to choose exile in order not to have to fight.'
one occasion, that is, they chose to be true to their homes at the
cost of fighting, and on the other to avoid fighting at the cost of
deserting their homes. 

19. Another line of argument is the assertion that some possible motive
for an event or state of things is the real one: e.g. that a gift
was given in order to cause pain by its withdrawal. This notion underlies
the lines: 

"God gives to many great prosperity, 

"Not of good God towards them, but to make 

"The ruin of them more conspicuous. "

Or take the passage from the Meleager of Antiphon: 

"To slay no boar, but to be witnesses 

"Of Meleager's prowess unto Greece. "

Or the argument in the Ajax of Theodectes, that Diomede chose out
Odysseus not to do him honour, but in order that his companion might
be a lesser man than himself-such a motive for doing so is quite possible.

20. Another line of argument is common to forensic and deliberative
oratory, namely, to consider inducements and deterrents, and the motives
people have for doing or avoiding the actions in question. These are
the conditions which make us bound to act if they are for us, and
to refrain from action if they are against us: that is, we are bound
to act if the action is possible, easy, and useful to ourselves or
our friends or hurtful to our enemies; this is true even if the action
entails loss, provided the loss is outweighed by the solid advantage.
A speaker will urge action by pointing to such conditions, and discourage
it by pointing to the opposite. These same arguments also form the
materials for accusation or defence-the deterrents being pointed out
by the defence, and the inducements by the prosecution. As for the
defence,...This topic forms the whole Art of Rhetoric both of Pamphilus
and of Callippus. 

21. Another line of argument refers to things which are supposed to
happen and yet seem incredible. We may argue that people could not
have believed them, if they had not been true or nearly true: even
that they are the more likely to be true because they are incredible.
For the things which men believe are either facts or probabilities:
if, therefore, a thing that is believed is improbable and even incredible,
it must be true, since it is certainly not believed because it is
at all probable or credible. An example is what Androcles of the deme
Pitthus said in his well-known arraignment of the law. The audience
tried to shout him down when he observed that the laws required a
law to set them right. 'Why', he went on, 'fish need salt, improbable
and incredible as this might seem for creatures reared in salt water;
and olive-cakes need oil, incredible as it is that what produces oil
should need it.' 

22. Another line of argument is to refute our opponent's case by noting
any contrasts or contradictions of dates, acts, or words that it anywhere
displays; and this in any of the three following connexions. (1) Referring
to our opponent's conduct, e.g. 'He says he is devoted to you, yet
he conspired with the Thirty.' (2) Referring to our own conduct, e.g.
'He says I am litigious, and yet he cannot prove that I have been
engaged in a single lawsuit.' (3) Referring to both of us together,
e.g. 'He has never even lent any one a penny, but I have ransomed
quite a number of you.' 

23. Another line that is useful for men and causes that have been
really or seemingly slandered, is to show why the facts are not as
supposed; pointing out that there is a reason for the false impression
given. Thus a woman, who had palmed off her son on another woman,
was thought to be the lad's mistress because she embraced him; but
when her action was explained the charge was shown to be groundless.
Another example is from the Ajax of Theodectes, where Odysseus tells
Ajax the reason why, though he is really braver than Ajax, he is not
thought so. 

24. Another line of argument is to show that if the cause is present,
the effect is present, and if absent, absent. For by proving the cause
you at once prove the effect, and conversely nothing can exist without
its cause. Thus Thrasybulus accused Leodamas of having had his name
recorded as a criminal on the slab in the Acropolis, and of erasing
the record in the time of the Thirty Tyrants: to which Leodamas replied,
'Impossible: for the Thirty would have trusted me all the more if
my quarrel with the commons had been inscribed on the slab.'

25. Another line is to consider whether the accused person can take
or could have taken a better course than that which he is recommending
or taking, or has taken. If he has not taken this better course, it
is clear that he is not guilty, since no one deliberately and consciously
chooses what is bad. This argument is, however, fallacious, for it
often becomes clear after the event how the action could have been
done better, though before the event this was far from clear.

26. Another line is, when a contemplated action is inconsistent with
any past action, to examine them both together. Thus, when the people
of Elea asked Xenophanes if they should or should not sacrifice to
Leucothea and mourn for her, he advised them not to mourn for her
if they thought her a goddess, and not to sacrifice to her if they
thought her a mortal woman. 

27. Another line is to make previous mistakes the grounds of accusation
or defence. Thus, in the Medea of Carcinus the accusers allege that
Medea has slain her children; 'at all events', they say, 'they are
not to be seen'-Medea having made the mistake of sending her children
away. In defence she argues that it is not her children, but Jason,
whom she would have slain; for it would have been a mistake on her
part not to do this if she had done the other. This special line of
argument for enthymeme forms the whole of the Art of Rhetoric in use
before Theodorus. 

"Another line is to draw meanings from names. Sophocles, for instance,
says, "

"O steel in heart as thou art steel in name. "

This line of argument is common in praises of the gods. Thus, too,
Conon called Thrasybulus rash in counsel. And Herodicus said of Thrasymachus,
'You are always bold in battle'; of Polus, 'you are always a colt';
and of the legislator Draco that his laws were those not of a human
being but of a dragon, so savage were they. And, in Euripides, Hecuba
says of Aphrodite, 

"Her name and Folly's (aphrosuns) lightly begin alike, "

and Chaeremon writes 

"Pentheus-a name foreshadowing grief (penthos) to come. "

The Refutative Enthymeme has a greater reputation than the Demonstrative,
because within a small space it works out two opposing arguments,
and arguments put side by side are clearer to the audience. But of
all syllogisms, whether refutative or demonstrative, those are most
applauded of which we foresee the conclusions from the beginning,
so long as they are not obvious at first sight-for part of the pleasure
we feel is at our own intelligent anticipation; or those which we
follow well enough to see the point of them as soon as the last word
has been uttered. 

Part 24

Besides genuine syllogisms, there may be syllogisms that look genuine
but are not; and since an enthymeme is merely a syllogism of a particular
kind, it follows that, besides genuine enthymemes, there may be those
that look genuine but are not. 

1. Among the lines of argument that form the Spurious Enthymeme the
first is that which arises from the particular words employed.

(a) One variety of this is when-as in dialectic, without having gone
through any reasoning process, we make a final statement as if it
were the conclusion of such a process, 'Therefore so-and-so is not
true', 'Therefore also so-and-so must be true'-so too in rhetoric
a compact and antithetical utterance passes for an enthymeme, such
language being the proper province of enthymeme, so that it is seemingly
the form of wording here that causes the illusion mentioned. In order
to produce the effect of genuine reasoning by our form of wording
it is useful to summarize the results of a number of previous reasonings:
as 'some he saved-others he avenged-the Greeks he freed'. Each of
these statements has been previously proved from other facts; but
the mere collocation of them gives the impression of establishing
some fresh conclusion. 

(b) Another variety is based on the use of similar words for different
things; e.g. the argument that the mouse must be a noble creature,
since it gives its name to the most august of all religious rites-for
such the Mysteries are. Or one may introduce, into a eulogy of the
dog, the dog-star; or Pan, because Pindar said: 

"O thou blessed one! 

"Thou whom they of Olympus call 

"The hound of manifold shape 

"That follows the Mother of Heaven: "

or we may argue that, because there is much disgrace in there not
being a dog about, there is honour in being a dog. Or that Hermes
is readier than any other god to go shares, since we never say 'shares
all round' except of him. Or that speech is a very excellent thing,
since good men are not said to be worth money but to be worthy of
esteem-the phrase 'worthy of esteem' also having the meaning of 'worth
speech'. 

2. Another line is to assert of the whole what is true of the parts,
or of the parts what is true of the whole. A whole and its parts are
supposed to be identical, though often they are not. You have therefore
to adopt whichever of these two lines better suits your purpose. That
is how Euthydemus argues: e.g. that any one knows that there is a
trireme in the Peiraeus, since he knows the separate details that
make up this statement. There is also the argument that one who knows
the letters knows the whole word, since the word is the same thing
as the letters which compose it; or that, if a double portion of a
certain thing is harmful to health, then a single portion must not
be called wholesome, since it is absurd that two good things should
make one bad thing. Put thus, the enthymeme is refutative; put as
follows; demonstrative: 'For one good thing cannot be made up of two
bad things.' The whole line of argument is fallacious. Again, there
is Polycrates' saying that Thrasybulus put down thirty tyrants, where
the speaker adds them up one by one. Or the argument in the Orestes
of Theodectes, where the argument is from part to whole:

"'Tis right that she who slays her lord should die. "

'It is right, too, that the son should avenge his father. Very good:
these two things are what Orestes has done.' Still, perhaps the two
things, once they are put together, do not form a right act. The fallacy
might also be said to be due to omission, since the speaker fails
to say by whose hand a husband-slayer should die. 

3. Another line is the use of indignant language, whether to support
your own case or to overthrow your opponent's. We do this when we
paint a highly-coloured picture of the situation without having proved
the facts of it: if the defendant does so, he produces an impression
of his innocence; and if the prosecutor goes into a passion, he produces
an impression of the defendant's guilt. Here there is no genuine enthymeme:
the hearer infers guilt or innocence, but no proof is given, and the
inference is fallacious accordingly. 

4. Another line is to use a 'Sign', or single instance, as certain
evidence; which, again, yields no valid proof. Thus, it might be said
that lovers are useful to their countries, since the love of Harmodius
and Aristogeiton caused the downfall of the tyrant Hipparchus. Or,
again, that Dionysius is a thief, since he is a vicious man-there
is, of course, no valid proof here; not every vicious man is a thief,
though every thief is a vicious man. 

5. Another line represents the accidental as essential. An instance
is what Polycrates says of the mice, that they 'came to the rescue'
because they gnawed through the bowstrings. Or it might be maintained
that an invitation to dinner is a great honour, for it was because
he was not invited that Achilles was 'angered' with the Greeks at
Tenedos? As a fact, what angered him was the insult involved; it was
a mere accident that this was the particular form that the insult
took. 

6. Another is the argument from consequence. In the Alexander, for
instance, it is argued that Paris must have had a lofty disposition,
since he despised society and lived by himself on Mount Ida: because
lofty people do this kind of thing, therefore Paris too, we are to
suppose, had a lofty soul. Or, if a man dresses fashionably and roams
around at night, he is a rake, since that is the way rakes behave.
Another similar argument points out that beggars sing and dance in
temples, and that exiles can live wherever they please, and that such
privileges are at the disposal of those we account happy and therefore
every one might be regarded as happy if only he has those privileges.
What matters, however, is the circumstances under which the privileges
are enjoyed. Hence this line too falls under the head of fallacies
by omission. 

7. Another line consists in representing as causes things which are
not causes, on the ground that they happened along with or before
the event in question. They assume that, because B happens after A,
it happens because of A. Politicians are especially fond of taking
this line. Thus Demades said that the policy of Demosthenes was the
cause of all the mischief, 'for after it the war occurred'.

8. Another line consists in leaving out any mention of time and circumstances.
E.g. the argument that Paris was justified in taking Helen, since
her father left her free to choose: here the freedom was presumably
not perpetual; it could only refer to her first choice, beyond which
her father's authority could not go. Or again, one might say that
to strike a free man is an act of wanton outrage; but it is not so
in every case-only when it is unprovoked. 

9. Again, a spurious syllogism may, as in 'eristical' discussions,
be based on the confusion of the absolute with that which is not absolute
but particular. As, in dialectic, for instance, it may be argued that
what-is-not is, on the ground that what-is-not is what-is-not: or
that the unknown can be known, on the ground that it can be known
to he unknown: so also in rhetoric a spurious enthymeme may be based
on the confusion of some particular probability with absolute probability.
Now no particular probability is universally probable: as Agathon
says, 

"One might perchance say that was probable- 

"That things improbable oft will hap to men. "

For what is improbable does happen, and therefore it is probable
that improbable things will happen. Granted this, one might argue
that 'what is improbable is probable'. But this is not true absolutely.
As, in eristic, the imposture comes from not adding any clause specifying
relationship or reference or manner; so here it arises because the
probability in question is not general but specific. It is of this
line of argument that Corax's Art of Rhetoric is composed. If the
accused is not open to the charge-for instance if a weakling be tried
for violent assault-the defence is that he was not likely to do such
a thing. But if he is open to the charge-i.e. if he is a strong man-the
defence is still that he was not likely to do such a thing, since
he could be sure that people would think he was likely to do it. And
so with any other charge: the accused must be either open or not open
to it: there is in either case an appearance of probable innocence,
but whereas in the latter case the probability is genuine, in the
former it can only be asserted in the special sense mentioned. This
sort of argument illustrates what is meant by making the worse argument
seem the better. Hence people were right in objecting to the training
Protagoras undertook to give them. It was a fraud; the probability
it handled was not genuine but spurious, and has a place in no art
except Rhetoric and Eristic. 

Part 25

Enthymemes, genuine and apparent, have now been described; the next
subject is their Refutation. 

An argument may be refuted either by a counter-syllogism or by bringing
an objection. It is clear that counter-syllogisms can be built up
from the same lines of arguments as the original syllogisms: for the
materials of syllogisms are the ordinary opinions of men, and such
opinions often contradict each other. Objections, as appears in the
Topics, may be raised in four ways-either by directly attacking your
opponent's own statement, or by putting forward another statement
like it, or by putting forward a statement contrary to it, or by quoting
previous decisions. 

1. By 'attacking your opponent's own statement' I mean, for instance,
this: if his enthymeme should assert that love is always good, the
objection can be brought in two ways, either by making the general
statement that 'all want is an evil', or by making the particular
one that there would be no talk of 'Caunian love' if there were not
evil loves as well as good ones. 

2. An objection 'from a contrary statement' is raised when, for instance,
the opponent's enthymeme having concluded that a good man does good
to all his friends, you object, 'That proves nothing, for a bad man
does not do evil to all his friends'. 

3. An example of an objection 'from a like statement' is, the enthymeme
having shown that ill-used men always hate their ill-users, to reply,
'That proves nothing, for well-used men do not always love those who
used them well'. 

4. The 'decisions' mentioned are those proceeding from well-known
men; for instance, if the enthymeme employed has concluded that 'that
allowance ought to be made for drunken offenders, since they did not
know what they were doing', the objection will be, 'Pittacus, then,
deserves no approval, or he would not have prescribed specially severe
penalties for offences due to drunkenness'. 

Enthymemes are based upon one or other of four kinds of alleged fact:
(1) Probabilities, (2) Examples, (3) Infallible Signs, (4) Ordinary
Signs. (1) Enthymemes based upon Probabilities are those which argue
from what is, or is supposed to be, usually true. (2) Enthymemes based
upon Example are those which proceed by induction from one or more
similar cases, arrive at a general proposition, and then argue deductively
to a particular inference. (3) Enthymemes based upon Infallible Signs
are those which argue from the inevitable and invariable. (4) Enthymemes
based upon ordinary Signs are those which argue from some universal
or particular proposition, true or false. 

Now (1) as a Probability is that which happens usually but not always,
Enthymemes founded upon Probabilities can, it is clear, always be
refuted by raising some objection. The refutation is not always genuine:
it may be spurious: for it consists in showing not that your opponent's
premiss is not probable, but Only in showing that it is not inevitably
true. Hence it is always in defence rather than in accusation that
it is possible to gain an advantage by using this fallacy. For the
accuser uses probabilities to prove his case: and to refute a conclusion
as improbable is not the same thing as to refute it as not inevitable.
Any argument based upon what usually happens is always open to objection:
otherwise it would not be a probability but an invariable and necessary
truth. But the judges think, if the refutation takes this form, either
that the accuser's case is not probable or that they must not decide
it; which, as we said, is a false piece of reasoning. For they ought
to decide by considering not merely what must be true but also what
is likely to be true: this is, indeed, the meaning of 'giving a verdict
in accordance with one's honest opinion'. Therefore it is not enough
for the defendant to refute the accusation by proving that the charge
is not hound to be true: he must do so by showing that it is not likely
to be true. For this purpose his objection must state what is more
usually true than the statement attacked. It may do so in either of
two ways: either in respect of frequency or in respect of exactness.
It will be most convincing if it does so in both respects; for if
the thing in question both happens oftener as we represent it and
happens more as we represent it, the probability is particularly great.

(2) Fallible Signs, and Enthymemes based upon them, can be refuted
even if the facts are correct, as was said at the outset. For we have
shown in the Analytics that no Fallible Sign can form part of a valid
logical proof. 

(3) Enthymemes depending on examples may be refuted in the same way
as probabilities. If we have a negative instance, the argument is
refuted, in so far as it is proved not inevitable, even though the
positive examples are more similar and more frequent. And if the positive
examples are more numerous and more frequent, we must contend that
the present case is dissimilar, or that its conditions are dissimilar,
or that it is different in some way or other. 

(4) It will be impossible to refute Infallible Signs, and Enthymemes
resting on them, by showing in any way that they do not form a valid
logical proof: this, too, we see from the Analytics. All we can do
is to show that the fact alleged does not exist. If there is no doubt
that it does, and that it is an Infallible Sign, refutation now becomes
impossible: for this is equivalent to a demonstration which is clear
in every respect. 

Part 26

Amplification and Depreciation are not an element of enthymeme. By
'an element of enthymeme' I mean the same thing as a line of enthymematic
argument-a general class embracing a large number of particular kinds
of enthymeme. Amplification and Depreciation are one kind of enthymeme,
viz. the kind used to show that a thing is great or small; just as
there are other kinds used to show that a thing is good or bad, just
or unjust, and anything else of the sort. All these things are the
subject-matter of syllogisms and enthymemes; none of these is the
line of argument of an enthymeme; no more, therefore, are Amplification
and Depreciation. Nor are Refutative Enthymemes a different species
from Constructive. For it is clear that refutation consists either
in offering positive proof or in raising an objection. In the first
case we prove the opposite of our adversary's statements. Thus, if
he shows that a thing has happened, we show that it has not; if he
shows that it has not happened, we show that it has. This, then, could
not be the distinction if there were one, since the same means are
employed by both parties, enthymemes being adduced to show that the
fact is or is not so-and-so. An objection, on the other hand, is not
an enthymeme at all, as was said in the Topics, consists in stating
some accepted opinion from which it will be clear that our opponent
has not reasoned correctly or has made a false assumption.

Three points must be studied in making a speech; and we have now completed
the account of (1) Examples, Maxims, Enthymemes, and in general the
thought-element the way to invent and refute arguments. We have next
to discuss (2) Style, and (3) Arrangement. 



BOOK III

Part 1 

In making a speech one must study three points: first, the means
of producing persuasion; second, the style, or language, to be used;
third, the proper arrangement of the various parts of the speech.
We have already specified the sources of persuasion. We have shown
that these are three in number; what they are; and why there are only
these three: for we have shown that persuasion must in every case
be effected either (1) by working on the emotions of the judges themselves,
(2) by giving them the right impression of the speakers' character,
or (3) by proving the truth of the statements made. 

Enthymemes also have been described, and the sources from which they
should be derived; there being both special and general lines of argument
for enthymemes. 

Our next subject will be the style of expression. For it is not enough
to know what we ought to say; we must also say it as we ought; much
help is thus afforded towards producing the right impression of a
speech. The first question to receive attention was naturally the
one that comes first naturally-how persuasion can be produced from
the facts themselves. The second is how to set these facts out in
language. A third would be the proper method of delivery; this is
a thing that affects the success of a speech greatly; but hitherto
the subject has been neglected. Indeed, it was long before it found
a way into the arts of tragic drama and epic recitation: at first
poets acted their tragedies themselves. It is plain that delivery
has just as much to do with oratory as with poetry. (In connexion
with poetry, it has been studied by Glaucon of Teos among others.)
It is, essentially, a matter of the right management of the voice
to express the various emotions-of speaking loudly, softly, or between
the two; of high, low, or intermediate pitch; of the various rhythms
that suit various subjects. These are the three things-volume of sound,
modulation of pitch, and rhythm-that a speaker bears in mind. It is
those who do bear them in mind who usually win prizes in the dramatic
contests; and just as in drama the actors now count for more than
the poets, so it is in the contests of public life, owing to the defects
of our political institutions. No systematic treatise upon the rules
of delivery has yet been composed; indeed, even the study of language
made no progress till late in the day. Besides, delivery is-very properly-not
regarded as an elevated subject of inquiry. Still, the whole business
of rhetoric being concerned with appearances, we must pay attention
to the subject of delivery, unworthy though it is, because we cannot
do without it. The right thing in speaking really is that we should
be satisfied not to annoy our hearers, without trying to delight them:
we ought in fairness to fight our case with no help beyond the bare
facts: nothing, therefore, should matter except the proof of those
facts. Still, as has been already said, other things affect the result
considerably, owing to the defects of our hearers. The arts of language
cannot help having a small but real importance, whatever it is we
have to expound to others: the way in which a thing is said does affect
its intelligibility. Not, however, so much importance as people think.
All such arts are fanciful and meant to charm the hearer. Nobody uses
fine language when teaching geometry. 

When the principles of delivery have been worked out, they will produce
the same effect as on the stage. But only very slight attempts to
deal with them have been made and by a few people, as by Thrasymachus
in his 'Appeals to Pity'. Dramatic ability is a natural gift, and
can hardly be systematically taught. The principles of good diction
can be so taught, and therefore we have men of ability in this direction
too, who win prizes in their turn, as well as those speakers who excel
in delivery-speeches of the written or literary kind owe more of their
effect to their direction than to their thought. 

It was naturally the poets who first set the movement going; for words
represent things, and they had also the human voice at their disposal,
which of all our organs can best represent other things. Thus the
arts of recitation and acting were formed, and others as well. Now
it was because poets seemed to win fame through their fine language
when their thoughts were simple enough, that the language of oratorical
prose at first took a poetical colour, e.g. that of Gorgias. Even
now most uneducated people think that poetical language makes the
finest discourses. That is not true: the language of prose is distinct
from that of poetry. This is shown by the state of things to-day,
when even the language of tragedy has altered its character. Just
as iambics were adopted, instead of tetrameters, because they are
the most prose-like of all metres, so tragedy has given up all those
words, not used in ordinary talk, which decorated the early drama
and are still used by the writers of hexameter poems. It is therefore
ridiculous to imitate a poetical manner which the poets themselves
have dropped; and it is now plain that we have not to treat in detail
the whole question of style, but may confine ourselves to that part
of it which concerns our present subject, rhetoric. The other--the
poetical--part of it has been discussed in the treatise on the Art
of Poetry. 

Part 2

We may, then, start from the observations there made, including the
definition of style. Style to be good must be clear, as is proved
by the fact that speech which fails to convey a plain meaning will
fail to do just what speech has to do. It must also be appropriate,
avoiding both meanness and undue elevation; poetical language is certainly
free from meanness, but it is not appropriate to prose. Clearness
is secured by using the words (nouns and verbs alike) that are current
and ordinary. Freedom from meanness, and positive adornment too, are
secured by using the other words mentioned in the Art of Poetry. Such
variation from what is usual makes the language appear more stately.
People do not feel towards strangers as they do towards their own
countrymen, and the same thing is true of their feeling for language.
It is therefore well to give to everyday speech an unfamiliar air:
people like what strikes them, and are struck by what is out of the
way. In verse such effects are common, and there they are fitting:
the persons and things there spoken of are comparatively remote from
ordinary life. In prose passages they are far less often fitting because
the subject-matter is less exalted. Even in poetry, it is not quite
appropriate that fine language should be used by a slave or a very
young man, or about very trivial subjects: even in poetry the style,
to be appropriate, must sometimes be toned down, though at other times
heightened. We can now see that a writer must disguise his art and
give the impression of speaking naturally and not artificially. Naturalness
is persuasive, artificiality is the contrary; for our hearers are
prejudiced and think we have some design against them, as if we were
mixing their wines for them. It is like the difference between the
quality of Theodorus' voice and the voices of all other actors: his
really seems to be that of the character who is speaking, theirs do
not. We can hide our purpose successfully by taking the single words
of our composition from the speech of ordinary life. This is done
in poetry by Euripides, who was the first to show the way to his successors.

Language is composed of nouns and verbs. Nouns are of the various
kinds considered in the treatise on Poetry. Strange words, compound
words, and invented words must be used sparingly and on few occasions:
on what occasions we shall state later. The reason for this restriction
has been already indicated: they depart from what is suitable, in
the direction of excess. In the language of prose, besides the regular
and proper terms for things, metaphorical terms only can be used with
advantage. This we gather from the fact that these two classes of
terms, the proper or regular and the metaphorical-these and no others-are
used by everybody in conversation. We can now see that a good writer
can produce a style that is distinguished without being obtrusive,
and is at the same time clear, thus satisfying our definition of good
oratorical prose. Words of ambiguous meaning are chiefly useful to
enable the sophist to mislead his hearers. Synonyms are useful to
the poet, by which I mean words whose ordinary meaning is the same,
e.g. 'porheueseai' (advancing) and 'badizein' (proceeding); these
two are ordinary words and have the same meaning. 

In the Art of Poetry, as we have already said, will be found definitions
of these kinds of words; a classification of Metaphors; and mention
of the fact that metaphor is of great value both in poetry and in
prose. Prose-writers must, however, pay specially careful attention
to metaphor, because their other resources are scantier than those
of poets. Metaphor, moreover, gives style clearness, charm, and distinction
as nothing else can: and it is not a thing whose use can be taught
by one man to another. Metaphors, like epithets, must be fitting,
which means that they must fairly correspond to the thing signified:
failing this, their inappropriateness will be conspicuous: the want
of harmony between two things is emphasized by their being placed
side by side. It is like having to ask ourselves what dress will suit
an old man; certainly not the crimson cloak that suits a young man.
And if you wish to pay a compliment, you must take your metaphor from
something better in the same line; if to disparage, from something
worse. To illustrate my meaning: since opposites are in the same class,
you do what I have suggested if you say that a man who begs 'prays',
and a man who prays 'begs'; for praying and begging are both varieties
of asking. So Iphicrates called Callias a 'mendicant priest' instead
of a 'torch-bearer', and Callias replied that Iphicrates must be uninitiated
or he would have called him not a 'mendicant priest' but a 'torch-bearer'.
Both are religious titles, but one is honourable and the other is
not. Again, somebody calls actors 'hangers-on of Dionysus', but they
call themselves 'artists': each of these terms is a metaphor, the
one intended to throw dirt at the actor, the other to dignify him.
And pirates now call themselves 'purveyors'. We can thus call a crime
a mistake, or a mistake a crime. We can say that a thief 'took' a
thing, or that he 'plundered' his victim. An expression like that
of Euripides' Telephus, 

"King of the oar, on Mysia's coast he landed, "

is inappropriate; the word 'king' goes beyond the dignity of the
subject, and so the art is not concealed. A metaphor may be amiss
because the very syllables of the words conveying it fail to indicate
sweetness of vocal utterance. Thus Dionysius the Brazen in his elegies
calls poetry 'Calliope's screech'. Poetry and screeching are both,
to be sure, vocal utterances. But the metaphor is bad, because the
sounds of 'screeching', unlike those of poetry, are discordant and
unmeaning. Further, in using metaphors to give names to nameless things,
we must draw them not from remote but from kindred and similar things,
so that the kinship is clearly perceived as soon as the words are
said. Thus in the celebrated riddle 

"I marked how a man glued bronze with fire to another man's body,
"

the process is nameless; but both it and gluing are a kind of application,
and that is why the application of the cupping-glass is here called
a 'gluing'. Good riddles do, in general, provide us with satisfactory
metaphors: for metaphors imply riddles, and therefore a good riddle
can furnish a good metaphor. Further, the materials of metaphors must
be beautiful; and the beauty, like the ugliness, of all words may,
as Licymnius says, lie in their sound or in their meaning. Further,
there is a third consideration-one that upsets the fallacious argument
of the sophist Bryson, that there is no such thing as foul language,
because in whatever words you put a given thing your meaning is the
same. This is untrue. One term may describe a thing more truly than
another, may be more like it, and set it more intimately before our
eyes. Besides, two different words will represent a thing in two different
lights; so on this ground also one term must be held fairer or fouler
than another. For both of two terms will indicate what is fair, or
what is foul, but not simply their fairness or their foulness, or
if so, at any rate not in an equal degree. The materials of metaphor
must be beautiful to the ear, to the understanding, to the eye or
some other physical sense. It is better, for instance, to say 'rosy-fingered
morn', than 'crimson-fingered' or, worse still, 'red-fingered morn'.
The epithets that we apply, too, may have a bad and ugly aspect, as
when Orestes is called a 'mother-slayer'; or a better one, as when
he is called his 'father's avenger'. Simonides, when the victor in
the mule-race offered him a small fee, refused to write him an ode,
because, he said, it was so unpleasant to write odes to half-asses:
but on receiving an adequate fee, he wrote 

"Hail to you, daughters of storm-footed steeds? "

though of course they were daughters of asses too. The same effect
is attained by the use of diminutives, which make a bad thing less
bad and a good thing less good. Take, for instance, the banter of
Aristophanes in the Babylonians where he uses 'goldlet' for 'gold',
'cloaklet' for 'cloak', 'scoffiet' for 'scoff, and 'plaguelet'. But
alike in using epithets and in using diminutives we must be wary and
must observe the mean. 

Part 3

Bad taste in language may take any of four forms: 
(1) The misuse of compound words. Lycophron, for instance, talks of
the 'many visaged heaven' above the 'giant-crested earth', and again
the 'strait-pathed shore'; and Gorgias of the 'pauper-poet flatterer'
and 'oath-breaking and over-oath-keeping'. Alcidamas uses such expressions
as 'the soul filling with rage and face becoming flame-flushed', and
'he thought their enthusiasm would be issue-fraught' and 'issue-fraught
he made the persuasion of his words', and 'sombre-hued is the floor
of the sea'.The way all these words are compounded makes them, we
feel, fit for verse only. This, then, is one form in which bad taste
is shown. 

(2) Another is the employment of strange words. For instance, Lycophron
talks of 'the prodigious Xerxes' and 'spoliative Sciron'; Alcidamas
of 'a toy for poetry' and 'the witlessness of nature', and says 'whetted
with the unmitigated temper of his spirit'. 

(3) A third form is the use of long, unseasonable, or frequent epithets.
It is appropriate enough for a poet to talk of 'white milk', in prose
such epithets are sometimes lacking in appropriateness or, when spread
too thickly, plainly reveal the author turning his prose into poetry.
Of course we must use some epithets, since they lift our style above
the usual level and give it an air of distinction. But we must aim
at the due mean, or the result will be worse than if we took no trouble
at all; we shall get something actually bad instead of something merely
not good. That is why the epithets of Alcidamas seem so tasteless;
he does not use them as the seasoning of the meat, but as the meat
itself, so numerous and swollen and aggressive are they. For instance,
he does not say 'sweat', but 'the moist sweat'; not 'to the Isthmian
games', but 'to the world-concourse of the Isthmian games'; not 'laws',
but 'the laws that are monarchs of states'; not 'at a run', but 'his
heart impelling him to speed of foot'; not 'a school of the Muses',
but 'Nature's school of the Muses had he inherited'; and so 'frowning
care of heart', and 'achiever' not of 'popularity' but of 'universal
popularity', and 'dispenser of pleasure to his audience', and 'he
concealed it' not 'with boughs' but 'with boughs of the forest trees',
and 'he clothed' not 'his body' but 'his body's nakedness', and 'his
soul's desire was counter imitative' (this's at one and the same time
a compound and an epithet, so that it seems a poet's effort), and
'so extravagant the excess of his wickedness'. We thus see how the
inappropriateness of such poetical language imports absurdity and
tastelessness into speeches, as well as the obscurity that comes from
all this verbosity-for when the sense is plain, you only obscure and
spoil its clearness by piling up words. 

The ordinary use of compound words is where there is no term for a
thing and some compound can be easily formed, like 'pastime' (chronotribein);
but if this is much done, the prose character disappears entirely.
We now see why the language of compounds is just the thing for writers
of dithyrambs, who love sonorous noises; strange words for writers
of epic poetry, which is a proud and stately affair; and metaphor
for iambic verse, the metre which (as has been already' said) is widely
used to-day. 

(4) There remains the fourth region in which bad taste may be shown,
metaphor. Metaphors like other things may be inappropriate. Some are
so because they are ridiculous; they are indeed used by comic as well
as tragic poets. Others are too grand and theatrical; and these, if
they are far-fetched, may also be obscure. For instance, Gorgias talks
of 'events that are green and full of sap', and says 'foul was the
deed you sowed and evil the harvest you reaped'. That is too much
like poetry. Alcidamas, again, called philosophy 'a fortress that
threatens the power of law', and the Odyssey 'a goodly looking-glass
of human life',' talked about 'offering no such toy to poetry': all
these expressions fail, for the reasons given, to carry the hearer
with them. The address of Gorgias to the swallow, when she had let
her droppings fall on him as she flew overhead, is in the best tragic
manner. He said, 'Nay, shame, O Philomela'. Considering her as a bird,
you could not call her act shameful; considering her as a girl, you
could; and so it was a good gibe to address her as what she was once
and not as what she is. 

Part 4

The Simile also is a metaphor; the difference is but slight. When
the poet says of Achilles that he 

"Leapt on the foe as a lion, "

this is a simile; when he says of him 'the lion leapt', it is a metaphor-here,
since both are courageous, he has transferred to Achilles the name
of 'lion'. Similes are useful in prose as well as in verse; but not
often, since they are of the nature of poetry. They are to be employed
just as metaphors are employed, since they are really the same thing
except for the difference mentioned. 

The following are examples of similes. Androtion said of Idrieus that
he was like a terrier let off the chain, that flies at you and bites
you-Idrieus too was savage now that he was let out of his chains.
Theodamas compared Archidamus to an Euxenus who could not do geometry-a
proportional simile, implying that Euxenus is an Archidamus who can
do geometry. In Plato's Republic those who strip the dead are compared
to curs which bite the stones thrown at them but do not touch the
thrower, and there is the simile about the Athenian people, who are
compared to a ship's captain who is strong but a little deaf; and
the one about poets' verses, which are likened to persons who lack
beauty but possess youthful freshness-when the freshness has faded
the charm perishes, and so with verses when broken up into prose.
Pericles compared the Samians to children who take their pap but go
on crying; and the Boeotians to holm-oaks, because they were ruining
one another by civil wars just as one oak causes another oak's fall.
Demosthenes said that the Athenian people were like sea-sick men on
board ship. Again, Demosthenes compared the political orators to nurses
who swallow the bit of food themselves and then smear the children's
lips with the spittle. Antisthenes compared the lean Cephisodotus
to frankincense, because it was his consumption that gave one pleasure.
All these ideas may be expressed either as similes or as metaphors;
those which succeed as metaphors will obviously do well also as similes,
and similes, with the explanation omitted, will appear as metaphors.
But the proportional metaphor must always apply reciprocally to either
of its co-ordinate terms. For instance, if a drinking-bowl is the
shield of Dionysus, a shield may fittingly be called the drinking-bowl
of Ares. 

Part 5

Such, then, are the ingredients of which speech is composed. The foundation
of good style is correctness of language, which falls under five heads.
(1) First, the proper use of connecting words, and the arrangement
of them in the natural sequence which some of them require. For instance,
the connective 'men' (e.g. ego men) requires the correlative de (e.g.
o de). The answering word must be brought in before the first has
been forgotten, and not be widely separated from it; nor, except in
the few cases where this is appropriate, is another connective to
be introduced before the one required. Consider the sentence, 'But
as soon as he told me (for Cleon had come begging and praying), took
them along and set out.' In this sentence many connecting words are
inserted in front of the one required to complete the sense; and if
there is a long interval before 'set out', the result is obscurity.
One merit, then, of good style lies in the right use of connecting
words. (2) The second lies in calling things by their own special
names and not by vague general ones. (3) The third is to avoid ambiguities;
unless, indeed, you definitely desire to be ambiguous, as those do
who have nothing to say but are pretending to mean something. Such
people are apt to put that sort of thing into verse. Empedocles, for
instance, by his long circumlocutions imposes on his hearers; these
are affected in the same way as most people are when they listen to
diviners, whose ambiguous utterances are received with nods of acquiescence-

"Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.
"

Diviners use these vague generalities about the matter in hand because
their predictions are thus, as a rule, less likely to be falsified.
We are more likely to be right, in the game of 'odd and even', if
we simply guess 'even' or 'odd' than if we guess at the actual number;
and the oracle-monger is more likely to be right if he simply says
that a thing will happen than if he says when it will happen, and
therefore he refuses to add a definite date. All these ambiguities
have the same sort of effect, and are to be avoided unless we have
some such object as that mentioned. (4) A fourth rule is to observe
Protagoras' classification of nouns into male, female, and inanimate;
for these distinctions also must be correctly given. 'Upon her arrival
she said her say and departed (e d elthousa kai dialechtheisa ocheto).'
(5) A fifth rule is to express plurality, fewness, and unity by the
correct wording, e.g. 'Having come, they struck me (oi d elthontes
etupton me).' 

It is a general rule that a written composition should be easy to
read and therefore easy to deliver. This cannot be so where there
are many connecting words or clauses, or where punctuation is hard,
as in the writings of Heracleitus. To punctuate Heracleitus is no
easy task, because we often cannot tell whether a particular word
belongs to what precedes or what follows it. Thus, at the outset of
his treatise he says, 'Though this truth is always men understand
it not', where it is not clear with which of the two clauses the word
'always' should be joined by the punctuation. Further, the following
fact leads to solecism, viz. that the sentence does not work out properly
if you annex to two terms a third which does not suit them both. Thus
either 'sound' or 'colour' will fail to work out properly with some
verbs: 'perceive' will apply to both, 'see' will not. Obscurity is
also caused if, when you intend to insert a number of details, you
do not first make your meaning clear; for instance, if you say, 'I
meant, after telling him this, that and the other thing, to set out',
rather than something of this kind 'I meant to set out after telling
him; then this, that, and the other thing occurred.' 

Part 6

The following suggestions will help to give your language impressiveness.
(1) Describe a thing instead of naming it: do not say 'circle', but
'that surface which extends equally from the middle every way'. To
achieve conciseness, do the opposite-put the name instead of the description.
When mentioning anything ugly or unseemly, use its name if it is the
description that is ugly, and describe it if it is the name that is
ugly. (2) Represent things with the help of metaphors and epithets,
being careful to avoid poetical effects. (3) Use plural for singular,
as in poetry, where one finds 

"Unto havens Achaean, "

though only one haven is meant, and 

"Here are my letter's many-leaved folds. "

(4) Do not bracket two words under one article, but put one article
with each; e.g. 'that wife of ours.' The reverse to secure conciseness;
e.g. 'our wife.' Use plenty of connecting words; conversely, to secure
conciseness, dispense with connectives, while still preserving connexion;
e.g. 'having gone and spoken', and 'having gone, I spoke', respectively.
(6) And the practice of Antimachus, too, is useful-to describe a thing
by mentioning attributes it does not possess; as he does in talking
of Teumessus 

"There is a little wind-swept knoll... "

A subject can be developed indefinitely along these lines. You may
apply this method of treatment by negation either to good or to bad
qualities, according to which your subject requires. It is from this
source that the poets draw expressions such as the 'stringless' or
'lyreless' melody, thus forming epithets out of negations. This device
is popular in proportional metaphors, as when the trumpet's note is
called 'a lyreless melody'. 

Part 7

Your language will be appropriate if it expresses emotion and character,
and if it corresponds to its subject. 'Correspondence to subject'
means that we must neither speak casually about weighty matters, nor
solemnly about trivial ones; nor must we add ornamental epithets to
commonplace nouns, or the effect will be comic, as in the works of
Cleophon, who can use phrases as absurd as 'O queenly fig-tree'. To
express emotion, you will employ the language of anger in speaking
of outrage; the language of disgust and discreet reluctance to utter
a word when speaking of impiety or foulness; the language of exultation
for a tale of glory, and that of humiliation for a tale of and so
in all other cases. 

This aptness of language is one thing that makes people believe in
the truth of your story: their minds draw the false conclusion that
you are to be trusted from the fact that others behave as you do when
things are as you describe them; and therefore they take your story
to be true, whether it is so or not. Besides, an emotional speaker
always makes his audience feel with him, even when there is nothing
in his arguments; which is why many speakers try to overwhelm their
audience by mere noise. 

Furthermore, this way of proving your story by displaying these signs
of its genuineness expresses your personal character. Each class of
men, each type of disposition, will have its own appropriate way of
letting the truth appear. Under 'class' I include differences of age,
as boy, man, or old man; of sex, as man or woman; of nationality,
as Spartan or Thessalian. By 'dispositions' I here mean those dispositions
only which determine the character of a man's for it is not every
disposition that does this. If, then, a speaker uses the very words
which are in keeping with a particular disposition, he will reproduce
the corresponding character; for a rustic and an educated man will
not say the same things nor speak in the same way. Again, some impression
is made upon an audience by a device which speech-writers employ to
nauseous excess, when they say 'Who does not know this?' or 'It is
known to everybody.' The hearer is ashamed of his ignorance, and agrees
with the speaker, so as to have a share of the knowledge that everybody
else possesses. 

All the variations of oratorical style are capable of being used in
season or out of season. The best way to counteract any exaggeration
is the well-worn device by which the speaker puts in some criticism
of himself; for then people feel it must be all right for him to talk
thus, since he certainly knows what he is doing. Further, it is better
not to have everything always just corresponding to everything else-your
hearers will see through you less easily thus. I mean for instance,
if your words are harsh, you should not extend this harshness to your
voice and your countenance and have everything else in keeping. If
you do, the artificial character of each detail becomes apparent;
whereas if you adopt one device and not another, you are using art
all the same and yet nobody notices it. (To be sure, if mild sentiments
are expressed in harsh tones and harsh sentiments in mild tones, you
become comparatively unconvincing.) Compound words, fairly plentiful
epithets, and strange words best suit an emotional speech. We forgive
an angry man for talking about a wrong as 'heaven-high' or 'colossal';
and we excuse such language when the speaker has his hearers already
in his hands and has stirred them deeply either by praise or blame
or anger or affection, as Isocrates, for instance, does at the end
of his Panegyric, with his 'name and fame' and 'in that they brooked'.
Men do speak in this strain when they are deeply stirred, and so,
once the audience is in a like state of feeling, approval of course
follows. This is why such language is fitting in poetry, which is
an inspired thing. This language, then, should be used either under
stress of emotion, or ironically, after the manner of Gorgias and
of the passages in the Phaedrus. 

Part 8

The form of a prose composition should be neither metrical nor destitute
of rhythm. The metrical form destroys the hearer's trust by its artificial
appearance, and at the same time it diverts his attention, making
him watch for metrical recurrences, just as children catch up the
herald's question, 'Whom does the freedman choose as his advocate?',
with the answer 'Cleon!' On the other hand, unrhythmical language
is too unlimited; we do not want the limitations of metre, but some
limitation we must have, or the effect will be vague and unsatisfactory.
Now it is number that limits all things; and it is the numerical limitation
of the forms of a composition that constitutes rhythm, of which metres
are definite sections. Prose, then, is to be rhythmical, but not metrical,
or it will become not prose but verse. It should not even have too
precise a prose rhythm, and therefore should only be rhythmical to
a certain extent. 

Of the various rhythms, the heroic has dignity, but lacks the tones
of the spoken language. The iambic is the very language of ordinary
people, so that in common talk iambic lines occur oftener than any
others: but in a speech we need dignity and the power of taking the
hearer out of his ordinary self. The trochee is too much akin to wild
dancing: we can see this in tetrameter verse, which is one of the
trochaic rhythms. 

There remains the paean, which speakers began to use in the time of
Thrasymachus, though they had then no name to give it. The paean is
a third class of rhythm, closely akin to both the two already mentioned;
it has in it the ratio of three to two, whereas the other two kinds
have the ratio of one to one, and two to one respectively. Between
the two last ratios comes the ratio of one-and-a-half to one, which
is that of the paean. 

Now the other two kinds of rhythm must be rejected in writing prose,
partly for the reasons given, and partly because they are too metrical;
and the paean must be adopted, since from this alone of the rhythms
mentioned no definite metre arises, and therefore it is the least
obtrusive of them. At present the same form of paean is employed at
the beginning a at the end of sentences, whereas the end should differ
from the beginning. There are two opposite kinds of paean, one of
which is suitable to the beginning of a sentence, where it is indeed
actually used; this is the kind that begins with a long syllable and
ends with three short ones, as 

"Dalogenes | eite Luki | an, "

and 

"Chruseokom | a Ekate | pai Dios. "

The other paean begins, conversely, with three short syllables and
ends with a long one, as 

"meta de lan | udata t ok | eanon e | oanise nux. "

This kind of paean makes a real close: a short syllable can give
no effect of finality, and therefore makes the rhythm appear truncated.
A sentence should break off with the long syllable: the fact that
it is over should be indicated not by the scribe, or by his period-mark
in the margin, but by the rhythm itself. 

We have now seen that our language must be rhythmical and not destitute
of rhythm, and what rhythms, in what particular shape, make it so.

Part 9

The language of prose must be either free-running, with its parts
united by nothing except the connecting words, like the preludes in
dithyrambs; or compact and antithetical, like the strophes of the
old poets. The free-running style is the ancient one, e.g. 'Herein
is set forth the inquiry of Herodotus the Thurian.' Every one used
this method formerly; not many do so now. By 'free-running' style
I mean the kind that has no natural stopping-places, and comes to
a stop only because there is no more to say of that subject. This
style is unsatisfying just because it goes on indefinitely-one always
likes to sight a stopping-place in front of one: it is only at the
goal that men in a race faint and collapse; while they see the end
of the course before them, they can keep on going. Such, then, is
the free-running kind of style; the compact is that which is in periods.
By a period I mean a portion of speech that has in itself a beginning
and an end, being at the same time not too big to be taken in at a
glance. Language of this kind is satisfying and easy to follow. It
is satisfying, because it is just the reverse of indefinite; and moreover,
the hearer always feels that he is grasping something and has reached
some definite conclusion; whereas it is unsatisfactory to see nothing
in front of you and get nowhere. It is easy to follow, because it
can easily be remembered; and this because language when in periodic
form can be numbered, and number is the easiest of all things to remember.
That is why verse, which is measured, is always more easily remembered
than prose, which is not: the measures of verse can be numbered. The
period must, further, not be completed until the sense is complete:
it must not be capable of breaking off abruptly, as may happen with
the following iambic lines of Sophocles- 

"Calydon's soil is this; of Pelops' land 

"(The smiling plains face us across the strait.) "

By a wrong division of the words the hearer may take the meaning to
be the reverse of what it is: for instance, in the passage quoted,
one might imagine that Calydon is in the Peloponnesus. 

A Period may be either divided into several members or simple. The
period of several members is a portion of speech (1) complete in itself,
(2) divided into parts, and (3) easily delivered at a single breath-as
a whole, that is; not by fresh breath being taken at the division.
A member is one of the two parts of such a period. By a 'simple' period,
I mean that which has only one member. The members, and the whole
periods, should be neither curt nor long. A member which is too short
often makes the listener stumble; he is still expecting the rhythm
to go on to the limit his mind has fixed for it; and if meanwhile
he is pulled back by the speaker's stopping, the shock is bound to
make him, so to speak, stumble. If, on the other hand, you go on too
long, you make him feel left behind, just as people who when walking
pass beyond the boundary before turning back leave their companions
behind So too if a period is too long you turn it into a speech, or
something like a dithyrambic prelude. The result is much like the
preludes that Democritus of Chios jeered at Melanippides for writing
instead of antistrophic stanzas- 

"He that sets traps for another man's feet 

"Is like to fall into them first; 

"And long-winded preludes do harm to us all, 

"But the preluder catches it worst. "

Which applies likewise to long-membered orators. Periods whose members
are altogether too short are not periods at all; and the result is
to bring the hearer down with a crash. 

The periodic style which is divided into members is of two kinds.
It is either simply divided, as in 'I have often wondered at the conveners
of national gatherings and the founders of athletic contests'; or
it is antithetical, where, in each of the two members, one of one
pair of opposites is put along with one of another pair, or the same
word is used to bracket two opposites, as 'They aided both parties-not
only those who stayed behind but those who accompanied them: for the
latter they acquired new territory larger than that at home, and to
the former they left territory at home that was large enough'. Here
the contrasted words are 'staying behind' and 'accompanying', 'enough'
and 'larger'. So in the example, 'Both to those who want to get property
and to those who desire to enjoy it' where 'enjoyment' is contrasted
with 'getting'. Again, 'it often happens in such enterprises that
the wise men fail and the fools succeed'; 'they were awarded the prize
of valour immediately, and won the command of the sea not long afterwards';
'to sail through the mainland and march through the sea, by bridging
the Hellespont and cutting through Athos'; 'nature gave them their
country and law took it away again'; 'of them perished in misery,
others were saved in disgrace'; 'Athenian citizens keep foreigners
in their houses as servants, while the city of Athens allows her allies
by thousands to live as the foreigner's slaves'; and 'to possess in
life or to bequeath at death'. There is also what some one said about
Peitholaus and Lycophron in a law-court, 'These men used to sell you
when they were at home, and now they have come to you here and bought
you'. All these passages have the structure described above. Such
a form of speech is satisfying, because the significance of contrasted
ideas is easily felt, especially when they are thus put side by side,
and also because it has the effect of a logical argument; it is by
putting two opposing conclusions side by side that you prove one of
them false. 

Such, then, is the nature of antithesis. Parisosis is making the two
members of a period equal in length. Paromoeosis is making the extreme
words of both members like each other. This must happen either at
the beginning or at the end of each member. If at the beginning, the
resemblance must always be between whole words; at the end, between
final syllables or inflexions of the same word or the same word repeated.
Thus, at the beginning 

"agron gar elaben arlon par' autou "

and 

"dorhetoi t epelonto pararretoi t epeessin "

At the end 

"ouk wethesan auton paidion tetokenai, 

"all autou aitlon lelonenai, "

and 

"en pleiotals de opontisi kai en elachistais elpisin "

An example of inflexions of the same word is 

"axios de staoenai chalkous ouk axios on chalkou; "

Of the same word repeated, 

"su d' auton kai zonta eleges kakos kai nun grafeis kakos.
"

Of one syllable, 

"ti d' an epaoes deinon, ei andrh' eides arhgon; "

It is possible for the same sentence to have all these features together-antithesis,
parison, and homoeoteleuton. (The possible beginnings of periods have
been pretty fully enumerated in the Theodectea.) There are also spurious
antitheses, like that of Epicharmus- 

"There one time I as their guest did stay, 

"And they were my hosts on another day. "

Part 10

We may now consider the above points settled, and pass on to say something
about the way to devise lively and taking sayings. Their actual invention
can only come through natural talent or long practice; but this treatise
may indicate the way it is done. We may deal with them by enumerating
the different kinds of them. We will begin by remarking that we all
naturally find it agreeable to get hold of new ideas easily: words
express ideas, and therefore those words are the most agreeable that
enable us to get hold of new ideas. Now strange words simply puzzle
us; ordinary words convey only what we know already; it is from metaphor
that we can best get hold of something fresh. When the poet calls
'old age a withered stalk', he conveys a new idea, a new fact, to
us by means of the general notion of bloom, which is common to both
things. The similes of the poets do the same, and therefore, if they
are good similes, give an effect of brilliance. The simile, as has
been said before, is a metaphor, differing from it only in the way
it is put; and just because it is longer it is less attractive. Besides,
it does not say outright that 'this' is 'that', and therefore the
hearer is less interested in the idea. We see, then, that both speech
and reasoning are lively in proportion as they make us seize a new
idea promptly. For this reason people are not much taken either by
obvious arguments (using the word 'obvious' to mean what is plain
to everybody and needs no investigation), nor by those which puzzle
us when we hear them stated, but only by those which convey their
information to us as soon as we hear them, provided we had not the
information already; or which the mind only just fails to keep up
with. These two kinds do convey to us a sort of information: but the
obvious and the obscure kinds convey nothing, either at once or later
on. It is these qualities, then, that, so far as the meaning of what
is said is concerned, make an argument acceptable. So far as the style
is concerned, it is the antithetical form that appeals to us, e.g.
'judging that the peace common to all the rest was a war upon their
own private interests', where there is an antithesis between war and
peace. It is also good to use metaphorical words; but the metaphors
must not be far-fetched, or they will be difficult to grasp, nor obvious,
or they will have no effect. The words, too, ought to set the scene
before our eyes; for events ought to be seen in progress rather than
in prospect. So we must aim at these three points: Antithesis, Metaphor,
and Actuality. 

Of the four kinds of Metaphor the most taking is the proportional
kind. Thus Pericles, for instance, said that the vanishing from their
country of the young men who had fallen in the war was 'as if the
spring were taken out of the year'. Leptines, speaking of the Lacedaemonians,
said that he would not have the Athenians let Greece 'lose one of
her two eyes'. When Chares was pressing for leave to be examined upon
his share in the Olynthiac war, Cephisodotus was indignant, saying
that he wanted his examination to take place 'while he had his fingers
upon the people's throat'. The same speaker once urged the Athenians
to march to Euboea, 'with Miltiades' decree as their rations'. Iphicrates,
indignant at the truce made by the Athenians with Epidaurus and the
neighbouring sea-board, said that they had stripped themselves of
their travelling money for the journey of war. Peitholaus called the
state-galley 'the people's big stick', and Sestos 'the corn-bin of
the Peiraeus'. Pericles bade his countrymen remove Aegina, 'that eyesore
of the Peiraeus.' And Moerocles said he was no more a rascal than
was a certain respectable citizen he named, 'whose rascality was worth
over thirty per cent per annum to him, instead of a mere ten like
his own'.There is also the iambic line of Anaxandrides about the way
his daughters put off marrying- 

"My daughters' marriage-bonds are overdue. "

Polyeuctus said of a paralytic man named Speusippus that he could
not keep quiet, 'though fortune had fastened him in the pillory of
disease'. Cephisodotus called warships 'painted millstones'. Diogenes
the Dog called taverns 'the mess-rooms of Attica'. Aesion said that
the Athenians had 'emptied' their town into Sicily: this is a graphic
metaphor. 'Till all Hellas shouted aloud' may be regarded as a metaphor,
and a graphic one again. Cephisodotus bade the Athenians take care
not to hold too many 'parades'. Isocrates used the same word of those
who 'parade at the national festivals.' Another example occurs in
the Funeral Speech: 'It is fitting that Greece should cut off her
hair beside the tomb of those who fell at Salamis, since her freedom
and their valour are buried in the same grave.' Even if the speaker
here had only said that it was right to weep when valour was being
buried in their grave, it would have been a metaphor, and a graphic
one; but the coupling of 'their valour' and 'her freedom' presents
a kind of antithesis as well. 'The course of my words', said Iphicrates,
'lies straight through the middle of Chares' deeds': this is a proportional
metaphor, and the phrase 'straight through the middle' makes it graphic.
The expression 'to call in one danger to rescue us from another' is
a graphic metaphor. Lycoleon said, defending Chabrias, 'They did not
respect even that bronze statue of his that intercedes for him yonder'.This
was a metaphor for the moment, though it would not always apply; a
vivid metaphor, however; Chabrias is in danger, and his statue intercedes
for him-that lifeless yet living thing which records his services
to his country. 'Practising in every way littleness of mind' is metaphorical,
for practising a quality implies increasing it. So is 'God kindled
our reason to be a lamp within our soul', for both reason and light
reveal things. So is 'we are not putting an end to our wars, but only
postponing them', for both literal postponement and the making of
such a peace as this apply to future action. So is such a saying as
'This treaty is a far nobler trophy than those we set up on fields
of battle; they celebrate small gains and single successes; it celebrates
our triumph in the war as a whole'; for both trophy and treaty are
signs of victory. So is 'A country pays a heavy reckoning in being
condemned by the judgement of mankind', for a reckoning is damage
deservedly incurred. 

Part 11

It has already been mentioned that liveliness is got by using the
proportional type of metaphor and being making (ie. making your hearers
see things). We have still to explain what we mean by their 'seeing
things', and what must be done to effect this. By 'making them see
things' I mean using expressions that represent things as in a state
of activity. Thus, to say that a good man is 'four-square' is certainly
a metaphor; both the good man and the square are perfect; but the
metaphor does not suggest activity. On the other hand, in the expression
'with his vigour in full bloom' there is a notion of activity; and
so in 'But you must roam as free as a sacred victim'; and in

"Thereas up sprang the Hellenes to their feet, "

where 'up sprang' gives us activity as well as metaphor, for it at
once suggests swiftness. So with Homer's common practice of giving
metaphorical life to lifeless things: all such passages are distinguished
by the effect of activity they convey. Thus, 

"Downward anon to the valley rebounded the boulder remorseless; and
"

"The (bitter) arrow flew; "

and 

"Flying on eagerly; and "

Stuck in the earth, still panting to feed on the flesh of the heroes;
and 

"And the point of the spear in its fury drove 

"full through his breastbone. "

In all these examples the things have the effect of being active
because they are made into living beings; shameless behaviour and
fury and so on are all forms of activity. And the poet has attached
these ideas to the things by means of proportional metaphors: as the
stone is to Sisyphus, so is the shameless man to his victim. In his
famous similes, too, he treats inanimate things in the same way:

"Curving and crested with white, host following 

"host without ceasing. "

Here he represents everything as moving and living; and activity
is movement. 

Metaphors must be drawn, as has been said already, from things that
are related to the original thing, and yet not obviously so related-just
as in philosophy also an acute mind will perceive resemblances even
in things far apart. Thus Archytas said that an arbitrator and an
altar were the same, since the injured fly to both for refuge. Or
you might say that an anchor and an overhead hook were the same, since
both are in a way the same, only the one secures things from below
and the other from above. And to speak of states as 'levelled' is
to identify two widely different things, the equality of a physical
surface and the equality of political powers. 

Liveliness is specially conveyed by metaphor, and by the further power
of surprising the hearer; because the hearer expected something different,
his acquisition of the new idea impresses him all the more. His mind
seems to say, 'Yes, to be sure; I never thought of that'. The liveliness
of epigrammatic remarks is due to the meaning not being just what
the words say: as in the saying of Stesichorus that 'the cicalas will
chirp to themselves on the ground'. Well-constructed riddles are attractive
for the same reason; a new idea is conveyed, and there is metaphorical
expression. So with the 'novelties' of Theodorus. In these the thought
is startling, and, as Theodorus puts it, does not fit in with the
ideas you already have. They are like the burlesque words that one
finds in the comic writers. The effect is produced even by jokes depending
upon changes of the letters of a word; this too is a surprise. You
find this in verse as well as in prose. The word which comes is not
what the hearer imagined: thus 

"Onward he came, and his feet were shod with his-chilblains,
"

where one imagined the word would be 'sandals'. But the point should
be clear the moment the words are uttered. Jokes made by altering
the letters of a word consist in meaning, not just what you say, but
something that gives a twist to the word used; e.g. the remark of
Theodorus about Nicon the harpist Thratt' ei su ('you Thracian slavey'),
where he pretends to mean Thratteis su ('you harpplayer'), and surprises
us when we find he means something else. So you enjoy the point when
you see it, though the remark will fall flat unless you are aware
that Nicon is Thracian. Or again: Boulei auton persai. In both these
cases the saying must fit the facts. This is also true of such lively
remarks as the one to the effect that to the Athenians their empire
(arche) of the sea was not the beginning (arche) of their troubles,
since they gained by it. Or the opposite one of Isocrates, that their
empire (arche) was the beginning (arche) of their troubles. Either
way, the speaker says something unexpected, the soundness of which
is thereupon recognized. There would be nothing clever is saying 'empire
is empire'. Isocrates means more than that, and uses the word with
a new meaning. So too with the former saying, which denies that arche
in one sense was arche in another sense. In all these jokes, whether
a word is used in a second sense or metaphorically, the joke is good
if it fits the facts. For instance, Anaschetos (proper name) ouk anaschetos:
where you say that what is so-and-so in one sense is not so-and-so
in another; well, if the man is unpleasant, the joke fits the facts.
Again, take- 

"Thou must not be a stranger stranger than Thou should'st.
"

Do not the words 'thou must not be', &c., amount to saying that the
stranger must not always be strange? Here again is the use of one
word in different senses. Of the same kind also is the much-praised
verse of Anaxandrides: 

"Death is most fit before you do 

"Deeds that would make death fit for you. "

This amounts to saying 'it is a fit thing to die when you are not
fit to die', or 'it is a fit thing to die when death is not fit for
you', i.e. when death is not the fit return for what you are doing.
The type of language employed-is the same in all these examples; but
the more briefly and antithetically such sayings can be expressed,
the more taking they are, for antithesis impresses the new idea more
firmly and brevity more quickly. They should always have either some
personal application or some merit of expression, if they are to be
true without being commonplace-two requirements not always satisfied
simultaneously. Thus 'a man should die having done no wrong' is true
but dull: 'the right man should marry the right woman' is also true
but dull. No, there must be both good qualities together, as in 'it
is fitting to die when you are not fit for death'. The more a saying
has these qualitis, the livelier it appears: if, for instance, its
wording is metaphorical, metaphorical in the right way, antithetical,
and balanced, and at the same time it gives an idea of activity.

Successful similes also, as has been said above, are in a sense metaphors,
since they always involve two relations like the proportional metaphor.
Thus: a shield, we say, is the 'drinking-bowl of Ares', and a bow
is the 'chordless lyre'. This way of putting a metaphor is not 'simple',
as it would be if we called the bow a lyre or the shield a drinking-bowl.
There are 'simple' similes also: we may say that a flute-player is
like a monkey, or that a short-sighted man's eyes are like a lamp-flame
with water dropping on it, since both eyes and flame keep winking.
A simile succeeds best when it is a converted metaphor, for it is
possible to say that a shield is like the drinking-bowl of Ares, or
that a ruin is like a house in rags, and to say that Niceratus is
like a Philoctetes stung by Pratys-the simile made by Thrasyniachus
when he saw Niceratus, who had been beaten by Pratys in a recitation
competition, still going about unkempt and unwashed. It is in these
respects that poets fail worst when they fail, and succeed best when
they succeed, i.e. when they give the resemblance pat, as in

"Those legs of his curl just like parsley leaves; "

and 

"Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball. "

These are all similes; and that similes are metaphors has been stated
often already. 

Proverbs, again, are metaphors from one species to another. Suppose,
for instance, a man to start some undertaking in hope of gain and
then to lose by it later on, 'Here we have once more the man of Carpathus
and his hare', says he. For both alike went through the said experience.

It has now been explained fairly completely how liveliness is secured
and why it has the effect it has. Successful hyperboles are also metaphors,
e.g. the one about the man with a black eye, 'you would have thought
he was a basket of mulberries'; here the 'black eye' is compared to
a mulberry because of its colour, the exaggeration lying in the quantity
of mulberries suggested. The phrase 'like so-and-so' may introduce
a hyperbole under the form of a simile. Thus 

"Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball "

is equivalent to 'you would have thought he was Philammon struggling
with his punchball'; and 

"Those legs of his curl just like parsley leaves "

is equivalent to 'his legs are so curly that you would have thought
they were not legs but parsley leaves'. Hyperboles are for young men
to use; they show vehemence of character; and this is why angry people
use them more than other people. 

"Not though he gave me as much as the dust 

"or the sands of the sea... 

"But her, the daughter of Atreus' son, I never will marry,

"Nay, not though she were fairer than Aphrodite the Golden,

"Defter of hand than Athene... "

(The Attic orators are particularly fond of this method of speech.)
Consequently it does not suit an elderly speaker. 

Part 12

It should be observed that each kind of rhetoric has its own appropriate
style. The style of written prose is not that of spoken oratory, nor
are those of political and forensic speaking the same. Both written
and spoken have to be known. To know the latter is to know how to
speak good Greek. To know the former means that you are not obliged,
as otherwise you are, to hold your tongue when you wish to communicate
something to the general public. 

The written style is the more finished: the spoken better admits of
dramatic delivery-like the kind of oratory that reflects character
and the kind that reflects emotion. Hence actors look out for plays
written in the latter style, and poets for actors competent to act
in such plays. Yet poets whose plays are meant to be read are read
and circulated: Chaeremon, for instance, who is as finished as a professional
speech-writer; and Licymnius among the dithyrambic poets. Compared
with those of others, the speeches of professional writers sound thin
in actual contests. Those of the orators, on the other hand, are good
to hear spoken, but look amateurish enough when they pass into the
hands of a reader. This is just because they are so well suited for
an actual tussle, and therefore contain many dramatic touches, which,
being robbed of all dramatic rendering, fail to do their own proper
work, and consequently look silly. Thus strings of unconnected words,
and constant repetitions of words and phrases, are very properly condemned
in written speeches: but not in spoken speeches-speakers use them
freely, for they have a dramatic effect. In this repetition there
must be variety of tone, paving the way, as it were, to dramatic effect;
e.g. 'This is the villain among you who deceived you, who cheated
you, who meant to betray you completely'. This is the sort of thing
that Philemon the actor used to do in the Old Men's Madness of Anaxandrides
whenever he spoke the words 'Rhadamanthus and Palamedes', and also
in the prologue to the Saints whenever he pronounced the pronoun 'I'.
If one does not deliver such things cleverly, it becomes a case of
'the man who swallowed a poker'. So too with strings of unconnected
words, e.g.'I came to him; I met him; I besought him'. Such passages
must be acted, not delivered with the same quality and pitch of voice,
as though they had only one idea in them. They have the further peculiarity
of suggesting that a number of separate statements have been made
in the time usually occupied by one. Just as the use of conjunctions
makes many statements into a single one, so the omission of conjunctions
acts in the reverse way and makes a single one into many. It thus
makes everything more important: e.g. 'I came to him; I talked to
him; I entreated him'-what a lot of facts! the hearer thinks-'he paid
no attention to anything I said'. This is the effect which Homer seeks
when he writes, 

"Nireus likewise from Syme (three well-fashioned ships did bring),

"Nireus, the son of Aglaia (and Charopus, bright-faced king),

"Nireus, the comeliest man (of all that to Ilium's strand).
"

If many things are said about a man, his name must be mentioned many
times; and therefore people think that, if his name is mentioned many
times, many things have been said about him. So that Homer, by means
of this illusion, has made a great deal of though he has mentioned
him only in this one passage, and has preserved his memory, though
he nowhere says a word about him afterwards. 

Now the style of oratory addressed to public assemblies is really
just like scene-painting. The bigger the throng, the more distant
is the point of view: so that, in the one and the other, high finish
in detail is superfluous and seems better away. The forensic style
is more highly finished; still more so is the style of language addressed
to a single judge, with whom there is very little room for rhetorical
artifices, since he can take the whole thing in better, and judge
of what is to the point and what is not; the struggle is less intense
and so the judgement is undisturbed. This is why the same speakers
do not distinguish themselves in all these branches at once; high
finish is wanted least where dramatic delivery is wanted most, and
here the speaker must have a good voice, and above all, a strong one.
It is ceremonial oratory that is most literary, for it is meant to
be read; and next to it forensic oratory. 

To analyse style still further, and add that it must be agreeable
or magnificent, is useless; for why should it have these traits any
more than 'restraint', 'liberality', or any other moral excellence?
Obviously agreeableness will be produced by the qualities already
mentioned, if our definition of excellence of style has been correct.
For what other reason should style be 'clear', and 'not mean' but
'appropriate'? If it is prolix, it is not clear; nor yet if it is
curt. Plainly the middle way suits best. Again, style will be made
agreeable by the elements mentioned, namely by a good blending of
ordinary and unusual words, by the rhythm, and by-the persuasiveness
that springs from appropriateness. 

This concludes our discussion of style, both in its general aspects
and in its special applications to the various branches of rhetoric.
We have now to deal with Arrangement. 

Part 13

A speech has two parts. You must state your case, and you must prove
it. You cannot either state your case and omit to prove it, or prove
it without having first stated it; since any proof must be a proof
of something, and the only use of a preliminary statement is the proof
that follows it. Of these two parts the first part is called the Statement
of the case, the second part the Argument, just as we distinguish
between Enunciation and Demonstration. The current division is absurd.
For 'narration' surely is part of a forensic speech only: how in a
political speech or a speech of display can there be 'narration' in
the technical sense? or a reply to a forensic opponent? or an epilogue
in closely-reasoned speeches? Again, introduction, comparison of conflicting
arguments, and recapitulation are only found in political speeches
when there is a struggle between two policies. They may occur then;
so may even accusation and defence, often enough; but they form no
essential part of a political speech. Even forensic speeches do not
always need epilogues; not, for instance, a short speech, nor one
in which the facts are easy to remember, the effect of an epilogue
being always a reduction in the apparent length. It follows, then,
that the only necessary parts of a speech are the Statement and the
Argument. These are the essential features of a speech; and it cannot
in any case have more than Introduction, Statement, Argument, and
Epilogue. 'Refutation of the Opponent' is part of the arguments: so
is 'Comparison' of the opponent's case with your own, for that process
is a magnifying of your own case and therefore a part of the arguments,
since one who does this proves something. The Introduction does nothing
like this; nor does the Epilogue-it merely reminds us of what has
been said already. If we make such distinctions we shall end, like
Theodorus and his followers, by distinguishing 'narration' proper
from 'post-narration' and 'pre-narration', and 'refutation' from 'final
refutation'. But we ought only to bring in a new name if it indicates
a real species with distinct specific qualities; otherwise the practice
is pointless and silly, like the way Licymnius invented names in his
Art of Rhetoric-'Secundation', 'Divagation', 'Ramification'.

Part 14

The Introduction is the beginning of a speech, corresponding to the
prologue in poetry and the prelude in flute-music; they are all beginnings,
paving the way, as it were, for what is to follow. The musical prelude
resembles the introduction to speeches of display; as flute players
play first some brilliant passage they know well and then fit it on
to the opening notes of the piece itself, so in speeches of display
the writer should proceed in the same way; he should begin with what
best takes his fancy, and then strike up his theme and lead into it;
which is indeed what is always done. (Take as an example the introduction
to the Helen of Isocrates-there is nothing in common between the 'eristics'
and Helen.) And here, even if you travel far from your subject, it
is fitting, rather than that there should be sameness in the entire
speech. 

The usual subject for the introductions to speeches of display is
some piece of praise or censure. Thus Gorgias writes in his Olympic
Speech, 'You deserve widespread admiration, men of Greece', praising
thus those who start,ed the festival gatherings.' Isocrates, on the
other hand, censures them for awarding distinctions to fine athletes
but giving no prize for intellectual ability. Or one may begin with
a piece of advice, thus: 'We ought to honour good men and so I myself
am praising Aristeides' or 'We ought to honour those who are unpopular
but not bad men, men whose good qualities have never been noticed,
like Alexander son of Priam.' Here the orator gives advice. Or we
may begin as speakers do in the law-courts; that is to say, with appeals
to the audience to excuse us if our speech is about something paradoxical,
difficult, or hackneyed; like Choerilus in the lines- 

"But now when allotment of all has been made... "

Introductions to speeches of display, then, may be composed of some
piece of praise or censure, of advice to do or not to do something,
or of appeals to the audience; and you must choose between making
these preliminary passages connected or disconnected with the speech
itself. 

Introductions to forensic speeches, it must be observed, have the
same value as the prologues of dramas and the introductions to epic
poems; the dithyrambic prelude resembling the introduction to a speech
of display, as 

"For thee, and thy gilts, and thy battle-spoils.... "

In prologues, and in epic poetry, a foretaste of the theme is given,
intended to inform the hearers of it in advance instead of keeping
their minds in suspense. Anything vague puzzles them: so give them
a grasp of the beginning, and they can hold fast to it and follow
the argument. So we find- 

"Sing, O goddess of song, of the Wrath... 

"Tell me, O Muse, of the hero... 

"Lead me to tell a new tale, how there came great warfare to Europe

"Out of the Asian land... "

The tragic poets, too, let us know the pivot of their play; if not
at the outset like Euripides, at least somewhere in the preface to
a speech like Sophocles- 

"Polybus was my father...; "

and so in Comedy. This, then, is the most essential function and
distinctive property of the introduction, to show what the aim of
the speech is; and therefore no introduction ought to be employed
where the subject is not long or intricate. 

The other kinds of introduction employed are remedial in purpose,
and may be used in any type of speech. They are concerned with the
speaker, the hearer, the subject, or the speaker's opponent. Those
concerned with the speaker himself or with his opponent are directed
to removing or exciting prejudice. But whereas the defendant will
begin by dealing with this sort of thing, the prosecutor will take
quite another line and deal with such matters in the closing part
of his speech. The reason for this is not far to seek. The defendant,
when he is going to bring himself on the stage, must clear away any
obstacles, and therefore must begin by removing any prejudice felt
against him. But if you are to excite prejudice, you must do so at
the close, so that the judges may more easily remember what you have
said. 

The appeal to the hearer aims at securing his goodwill, or at arousing
his resentment, or sometimes at gaining his serious attention to the
case, or even at distracting it-for gaining it is not always an advantage,
and speakers will often for that reason try to make him laugh.

You may use any means you choose to make your hearer receptive; among
others, giving him a good impression of your character, which always
helps to secure his attention. He will be ready to attend to anything
that touches himself and to anything that is important, surprising,
or agreeable; and you should accordingly convey to him the impression
that what you have to say is of this nature. If you wish to distract
his attention, you should imply that the subject does not affect him,
or is trivial or disagreeable. But observe, all this has nothing to
do with the speech itself. It merely has to do with the weak-minded
tendency of the hearer to listen to what is beside the point. Where
this tendency is absent, no introduction wanted beyond a summary statement
of your subject, to put a sort of head on the main body of your speech.
Moreover, calls for attention, when required, may come equally well
in any part of a speech; in fact, the beginning of it is just where
there is least slackness of interest; it is therefore ridiculous to
put this kind of thing at the beginning, when every one is listening
with most attention. Choose therefore any point in the speech where
such an appeal is needed, and then say 'Now I beg you to note this
point-it concerns you quite as much as myself'; or 

"I will tell you that whose like you have never yet "

heard for terror, or for wonder. This is what Prodicus called 'slipping
in a bit of the fifty-drachma show-lecture for the audience whenever
they began to nod'. It is plain that such introductions are addressed
not to ideal hearers, but to hearers as we find them. The use of introductions
to excite prejudice or to dispel misgivings is universal-

"My lord, I will not say that eagerly... "

or 

"Why all this preface? "

Introductions are popular with those whose case is weak, or looks
weak; it pays them to dwell on anything rather than the actual facts
of it. That is why slaves, instead of answering the questions put
to them, make indirect replies with long preambles. The means of exciting
in your hearers goodwill and various other feelings of the same kind
have already been described. The poet finely says May I find in Phaeacian
hearts, at my coming, goodwill and compassion; and these are the two
things we should aim at. In speeches of display we must make the hearer
feel that the eulogy includes either himself or his family or his
way of life or something or other of the kind. For it is true, as
Socrates says in the Funeral Speech, that 'the difficulty is not to
praise the Athenians at Athens but at Sparta'. 

The introductions of political oratory will be made out of the same
materials as those of the forensic kind, though the nature of political
oratory makes them very rare. The subject is known already, and therefore
the facts of the case need no introduction; but you may have to say
something on account of yourself or to your opponents; or those present
may be inclined to treat the matter either more or less seriously
than you wish them to. You may accordingly have to excite or dispel
some prejudice, or to make the matter under discussion seem more or
less important than before: for either of which purposes you will
want an introduction. You may also want one to add elegance to your
remarks, feeling that otherwise they will have a casual air, like
Gorgias' eulogy of the Eleans, in which, without any preliminary sparring
or fencing, he begins straight off with 'Happy city of Elis!'

Part 15

In dealing with prejudice, one class of argument is that whereby you
can dispel objectionable suppositions about yourself. It makes no
practical difference whether such a supposition has been put into
words or not, so that this distinction may be ignored. Another way
is to meet any of the issues directly: to deny the alleged fact; or
to say that you have done no harm, or none to him, or not as much
as he says; or that you have done him no injustice, or not much; or
that you have done nothing disgraceful, or nothing disgraceful enough
to matter: these are the sort of questions on which the dispute hinges.
Thus Iphicrates replying to Nausicrates, admitted that he had done
the deed alleged, and that he had done Nausicrates harm, but not that
he had done him wrong. Or you may admit the wrong, but balance it
with other facts, and say that, if the deed harmed him, at any rate
it was honourable; or that, if it gave him pain, at least it did him
good; or something else like that. Another way is to allege that your
action was due to mistake, or bad luck, or necessity as Sophocles
said he was not trembling, as his traducer maintained, in order to
make people think him an old man, but because he could not help it;
he would rather not be eighty years old. You may balance your motive
against your actual deed; saying, for instance, that you did not mean
to injure him but to do so-and-so; that you did not do what you are
falsely charged with doing-the damage was accidental-'I should indeed
be a detestable person if I had deliberately intended this result.'
Another way is open when your calumniator, or any of his connexions,
is or has been subject to the same grounds for suspicion. Yet another,
when others are subject to the same grounds for suspicion but are
admitted to be in fact innocent of the charge: e.g. 'Must I be a profligate
because I am well-groomed? Then so-and-so must be one too.' Another,
if other people have been calumniated by the same man or some one
else, or, without being calumniated, have been suspected, like yourself
now, and yet have been proved innocent. Another way is to return calumny
for calumny and say, 'It is monstrous to trust the man's statements
when you cannot trust the man himself.' Another is when the question
has been already decided. So with Euripides' reply to Hygiaenon, who,
in the action for an exchange of properties, accused him of impiety
in having written a line encouraging perjury- 

"My tongue hath sworn: no oath is on my soul. "

Euripides said that his opponent himself was guilty in bringing into
the law-courts cases whose decision belonged to the Dionysiac contests.
'If I have not already answered for my words there, I am ready to
do so if you choose to prosecute me there.' Another method is to denounce
calumny, showing what an enormity it is, and in particular that it
raises false issues, and that it means a lack of confidence in the
merits of his case. The argument from evidential circumstances is
available for both parties: thus in the Teucer Odysseus says that
Teucer is closely bound to Priam, since his mother Hesione was Priam's
sister. Teucer replies that Telamon his father was Priam's enemy,
and that he himself did not betray the spies to Priam. Another method,
suitable for the calumniator, is to praise some trifling merit at
great length, and then attack some important failing concisely; or
after mentioning a number of good qualities to attack one bad one
that really bears on the question. This is the method of thoroughly
skilful and unscrupulous prosecutors. By mixing up the man's merits
with what is bad, they do their best to make use of them to damage
him. 

There is another method open to both calumniator and apologist. Since
a given action can be done from many motives, the former must try
to disparage it by selecting the worse motive of two, the latter to
put the better construction on it. Thus one might argue that Diomedes
chose Odysseus as his companion because he supposed Odysseus to be
the best man for the purpose; and you might reply to this that it
was, on the contrary, because he was the only hero so worthless that
Diomedes need not fear his rivalry. 

Part 16

We may now pass from the subject of calumny to that of Narration.

Narration in ceremonial oratory is not continuous but intermittent.
There must, of course, be some survey of the actions that form the
subject-matter of the speech. The speech is a composition containing
two parts. One of these is not provided by the orator's art, viz.
the actions themselves, of which the orator is in no sense author.
The other part is provided by his namely, the proof (where proof is
needed) that the actions were done, the description of their quality
or of their extent, or even all these three things together. Now the
reason why sometimes it is not desirable to make the whole narrative
continuous is that the case thus expounded is hard to keep in mind.
Show, therefore, from one set of facts that your hero is, e.g. brave,
and from other sets of facts that he is able, just, &c. A speech thus
arranged is comparatively simple, instead of being complicated and
elaborate. You will have to recall well-known deeds among others;
and because they are well-known, the hearer usually needs no narration
of them; none, for instance, if your object is the praise of Achilles;
we all know the facts of his life-what you have to do is to apply
those facts. But if your object is the praise of Critias, you must
narrate his deeds, which not many people know of... 

Nowadays it is said, absurdly enough, that the narration should be
rapid. Remember what the man said to the baker who asked whether he
was to make the cake hard or soft: 'What, can't you make it right?'
Just so here. We are not to make long narrations, just as we are not
to make long introductions or long arguments. Here, again, rightness
does not consist either in rapidity or in conciseness, but in the
happy mean; that is, in saying just so much as will make the facts
plain, or will lead the hearer to believe that the thing has happened,
or that the man has caused injury or wrong to some one, or that the
facts are really as important as you wish them to be thought: or the
opposite facts to establish the opposite arguments. 

You may also narrate as you go anything that does credit to yourself,
e.g. 'I kept telling him to do his duty and not abandon his children';
or discredit to your adversary, e.g. 'But he answered me that, wherever
he might find himself, there he would find other children', the answer
Herodotus' records of the Egyptian mutineers. Slip in anything else
that the judges will enjoy. 

The defendant will make less of the narration. He has to maintain
that the thing has not happened, or did no harm, or was not unjust,
or not so bad as is alleged. He must therefor snot waste time about
what is admitted fact, unless this bears on his own contention; e.g.
that the thing was done, but was not wrong. Further, we must speak
of events as past and gone, except where they excite pity or indignation
by being represented as present. The Story told to Alcinous is an
example of a brief chronicle, when it is repeated to Penelope in sixty
lines. Another instance is the Epic Cycle as treated by Phayllus,
and the prologue to the Oeneus. 

The narration should depict character; to which end you must know
what makes it do so. One such thing is the indication of moral purpose;
the quality of purpose indicated determines the quality of character
depicted and is itself determined by the end pursued. Thus it is that
mathematical discourses depict no character; they have nothing to
do with moral purpose, for they represent nobody as pursuing any end.
On the other hand, the Socratic dialogues do depict character, being
concerned with moral questions. This end will also be gained by describing
the manifestations of various types of character, e.g. 'he kept walking
along as he talked', which shows the man's recklessness and rough
manners. Do not let your words seem inspired so much by intelligence,
in the manner now current, as by moral purpose: e.g. 'I willed this;
aye, it was my moral purpose; true, I gained nothing by it, still
it is better thus.' For the other way shows good sense, but this shows
good character; good sense making us go after what is useful, and
good character after what is noble. Where any detail may appear incredible,
then add the cause of it; of this Sophocles provides an example in
the Antigone, where Antigone says she had cared more for her brother
than for husband or children, since if the latter perished they might
be replaced, 

"But since my father and mother in their graves 

"Lie dead, no brother can be born to me. "

If you have no such cause to suggest, just say that you are aware
that no one will believe your words, but the fact remains that such
is our nature, however hard the world may find it to believe that
a man deliberately does anything except what pays him. 

Again, you must make use of the emotions. Relate the familiar manifestations
of them, and those that distinguish yourself and your opponent; for
instance, 'he went away scowling at me'. So Aeschines described Cratylus
as 'hissing with fury and shaking his fists'. These details carry
conviction: the audience take the truth of what they know as so much
evidence for the truth of what they do not. Plenty of such details
may be found in Homer: 

"Thus did she say: but the old woman buried her face in her hands:
"

a true touch-people beginning to cry do put their hands over their
eyes. 

Bring yourself on the stage from the first in the right character,
that people may regard you in that light; and the same with your adversary;
but do not let them see what you are about. How easily such impressions
may be conveyed we can see from the way in which we get some inkling
of things we know nothing of by the mere look of the messenger bringing
news of them. Have some narrative in many different parts of your
speech; and sometimes let there be none at the beginning of it.

In political oratory there is very little opening for narration; nobody
can 'narrate' what has not yet happened. If there is narration at
all, it will be of past events, the recollection of which is to help
the hearers to make better plans for the future. Or it may be employed
to attack some one's character, or to eulogize him-only then you will
not be doing what the political speaker, as such, has to do.

If any statement you make is hard to believe, you must guarantee its
truth, and at once offer an explanation, and then furnish it with
such particulars as will be expected. Thus Carcinus' Jocasta, in his
Oedipus, keeps guaranteeing the truth of her answers to the inquiries
of the man who is seeking her son; and so with Haemon in Sophocles.

Part 17

The duty of the Arguments is to attempt demonstrative proofs. These
proofs must bear directly upon the question in dispute, which must
fall under one of four heads. (1) If you maintain that the act was
not committed, your main task in court is to prove this. (2) If you
maintain that the act did no harm, prove this. If you maintain that
(3) the act was less than is alleged, or (4) justified, prove these
facts, just as you would prove the act not to have been committed
if you were maintaining that. 

It should be noted that only where the question in dispute falls under
the first of these heads can it be true that one of the two parties
is necessarily a rogue. Here ignorance cannot be pleaded, as it might
if the dispute were whether the act was justified or not. This argument
must therefore be used in this case only, not in the others.

In ceremonial speeches you will develop your case mainly by arguing
that what has been done is, e.g., noble and useful. The facts themselves
are to be taken on trust; proof of them is only submitted on those
rare occasions when they are not easily credible or when they have
been set down to some one else. 

In political speeches you may maintain that a proposal is impracticable;
or that, though practicable, it is unjust, or will do no good, or
is not so important as its proposer thinks. Note any falsehoods about
irrelevant matters-they will look like proof that his other statements
also are false. Argument by 'example' is highly suitable for political
oratory, argument by 'enthymeme' better suits forensic. Political
oratory deals with future events, of which it can do no more than
quote past events as examples. Forensic oratory deals with what is
or is not now true, which can better be demonstrated, because not
contingent-there is no contingency in what has now already happened.
Do not use a continuous succession of enthymemes: intersperse them
with other matter, or they will spoil one another's effect. There
are limits to their number- 

Friend, you have spoken as much as a sensible man would have spoken.
,as much' says Homer, not 'as well'. Nor should you try to make enthymemes
on every point; if you do, you will be acting just like some students
of philosophy, whose conclusions are more familiar and believable
than the premisses from which they draw them. And avoid the enthymeme
form when you are trying to rouse feeling; for it will either kill
the feeling or will itself fall flat: all simultaneous motions tend
to cancel each other either completely or partially. Nor should you
go after the enthymeme form in a passage where you are depicting character-the
process of demonstration can express neither moral character nor moral
purpose. Maxims should be employed in the Arguments-and in the Narration
too-since these do express character: 'I have given him this, though
I am quite aware that one should "Trust no man".' Or if you are appealing
to the emotions: 'I do not regret it, though I have been wronged;
if he has the profit on his side, I have justice on mine.'

Political oratory is a more difficult task than forensic; and naturally
so, since it deals with the future, whereas the pleader deals with
the past, which, as Epimenides of Crete said, even the diviners already
know. (Epimenides did not practise divination about the future; only
about the obscurities of the past.) Besides, in forensic oratory you
have a basis in the law; and once you have a starting-point, you can
prove anything with comparative ease. Then again, political oratory
affords few chances for those leisurely digressions in which you may
attack your adversary, talk about yourself, or work on your hearers'
emotions; fewer chances indeed, than any other affords, unless your
set purpose is to divert your hearers' attention. Accordingly, if
you find yourself in difficulties, follow the lead of the Athenian
speakers, and that of Isocrates, who makes regular attacks upon people
in the course of a political speech, e.g. upon the Lacedaemonians
in the Panegyricus, and upon Chares in the speech about the allies.
In ceremonial oratory, intersperse your speech with bits of episodic
eulogy, like Isocrates, who is always bringing some one forward for
this purpose. And this is what Gorgias meant by saying that he always
found something to talk about. For if he speaks of Achilles, he praises
Peleus, then Aeacus, then Zeus; and in like manner the virtue of valour,
describing its good results, and saying what it is like.

Now if you have proofs to bring forward, bring them forward, and your
moral discourse as well; if you have no enthymemes, then fall back
upon moral discourse: after all, it is more fitting for a good man
to display himself as an honest fellow than as a subtle reasoner.
Refutative enthymemes are more popular than demonstrative ones: their
logical cogency is more striking: the facts about two opposites always
stand out clearly when the two are nut side by side. 

The 'Reply to the Opponent' is not a separate division of the speech;
it is part of the Arguments to break down the opponent's case, whether
by objection or by counter-syllogism. Both in political speaking and
when pleading in court, if you are the first speaker you should put
your own arguments forward first, and then meet the arguments on the
other side by refuting them and pulling them to pieces beforehand.
If, however, the case for the other side contains a great variety
of arguments, begin with these, like Callistratus in the Messenian
assembly, when he demolished the arguments likely to be used against
him before giving his own. If you speak later, you must first, by
means of refutation and counter-syllogism, attempt some answer to
your opponent's speech, especially if his arguments have been well
received. For just as our minds refuse a favourable reception to a
person against whom they are prejudiced, so they refuse it to a speech
when they have been favourably impressed by the speech on the other
side. You should, therefore, make room in the minds of the audience
for your coming speech; and this will be done by getting your opponent's
speech out of the way. So attack that first-either the whole of it,
or the most important, successful, or vulnerable points in it, and
thus inspire confidence in what you have to say yourself-

"First, champion will I be of Goddesses... 

"Never, I ween, would Hera... "

where the speaker has attacked the silliest argument first. So much
for the Arguments. 

With regard to the element of moral character: there are assertions
which, if made about yourself, may excite dislike, appear tedious,
or expose you to the risk of contradiction; and other things which
you cannot say about your opponent without seeming abusive or ill-bred.
Put such remarks, therefore, into the mouth of some third person.
This is what Isocrates does in the Philippus and in the Antidosis,
and Archilochus in his satires. The latter represents the father himself
as attacking his daughter in the lampoon 

"Think nought impossible at all, 

"Nor swear that it shall not befall... "

and puts into the mouth of Charon the carpenter the lampoon which
begins 

"Not for the wealth of Gyes... "

So too Sophocles makes Haemon appeal to his father on behalf of Antigone
as if it were others who were speaking. 

Again, sometimes you should restate your enthymemes in the form of
maxims; e.g. 'Wise men will come to terms in the hour of success;
for they will gain most if they do'. Expressed as an enthymeme, this
would run, 'If we ought to come to terms when doing so will enable
us to gain the greatest advantage, then we ought to come to terms
in the hour of success.' 

Part 18

Next as to Interrogation. The best moment to a employ this is when
your opponent has so answered one question that the putting of just
one more lands him in absurdity. Thus Pericles questioned Lampon about
the way of celebrating the rites of the Saviour Goddess. Lampon declared
that no uninitiated person could be told of them. Pericles then asked,
'Do you know them yourself?' 'Yes', answered Lampon. 'Why,' said Pericles,
'how can that be, when you are uninitiated?' 

Another good moment is when one premiss of an argument is obviously
true, and you can see that your opponent must say 'yes' if you ask
him whether the other is true. Having first got this answer about
the other, do not go on to ask him about the obviously true one, but
just state the conclusion yourself. Thus, when Meletus denied that
Socrates believed in the existence of gods but admitted that he talked
about a supernatural power, Socrates proceeded to to ask whether 'supernatural
beings were not either children of the gods or in some way divine?'
'Yes', said Meletus. 'Then', replied Socrates, 'is there any one who
believes in the existence of children of the gods and yet not in the
existence of the gods themselves?' Another good occasion is when you
expect to show that your opponent is contradicting either his own
words or what every one believes. A fourth is when it is impossible
for him to meet your question except by an evasive answer. If he answers
'True, and yet not true', or 'Partly true and partly not true', or
'True in one sense but not in another', the audience thinks he is
in difficulties, and applauds his discomfiture. In other cases do
not attempt interrogation; for if your opponent gets in an objection,
you are felt to have been worsted. You cannot ask a series of questions
owing to the incapacity of the audience to follow them; and for this
reason you should also make your enthymemes as compact as possible.

In replying, you must meet ambiguous questions by drawing reasonable
distinctions, not by a curt answer. In meeting questions that seem
to involve you in a contradiction, offer the explanation at the outset
of your answer, before your opponent asks the next question or draws
his conclusion. For it is not difficult to see the drift of his argument
in advance. This point, however, as well as the various means of refutation,
may be regarded as known to us from the Topics. 

When your opponent in drawing his conclusion puts it in the form of
a question, you must justify your answer. Thus when Sophocles was
asked by Peisander whether he had, like the other members of the Board
of Safety, voted for setting up the Four Hundred, he said 'Yes.'-'Why,
did you not think it wicked?'-'Yes.'-'So you committed this wickedness?'
'Yes', said Sophocles, 'for there was nothing better to do.' Again,
the Lacedaemonian, when he was being examined on his conduct as ephor,
was asked whether he thought that the other ephors had been justly
put to death. 'Yes', he said. 'Well then', asked his opponent, 'did
not you propose the same measures as they?'-'Yes.'-'Well then, would
not you too be justly put to death?'-'Not at all', said he; 'they
were bribed to do it, and I did it from conviction'. Hence you should
not ask any further questions after drawing the conclusion, nor put
the conclusion itself in the form of a further question, unless there
is a large balance of truth on your side. 

As to jests. These are supposed to be of some service in controversy.
Gorgias said that you should kill your opponents' earnestness with
jesting and their jesting with earnestness; in which he was right.
jests have been classified in the Poetics. Some are becoming to a
gentleman, others are not; see that you choose such as become you.
Irony better befits a gentleman than buffoonery; the ironical man
jokes to amuse himself, the buffoon to amuse other people.

Part 19

The Epilogue has four parts. You must (1) make the audience well-disposed
towards yourself and ill-disposed towards your opponent (2) magnify
or minimize the leading facts, (3) excite the required state of emotion
in your hearers, and (4) refresh their memories. 

(1) Having shown your own truthfulness and the untruthfulness of your
opponent, the natural thing is to commend yourself, censure him, and
hammer in your points. You must aim at one of two objects-you must
make yourself out a good man and him a bad one either in yourselves
or in relation to your hearers. How this is to be managed-by what
lines of argument you are to represent people as good or bad-this
has been already explained. 

(2) The facts having been proved, the natural thing to do next is
to magnify or minimize their importance. The facts must be admitted
before you can discuss how important they are; just as the body cannot
grow except from something already present. The proper lines of argument
to be used for this purpose of amplification and depreciation have
already been set forth. 

(3) Next, when the facts and their importance are clearly understood,
you must excite your hearers' emotions. These emotions are pity, indignation,
anger, hatred, envy, emulation, pugnacity. The lines of argument to
be used for these purposes also have been previously mentioned.

(4) Finally you have to review what you have already said. Here you
may properly do what some wrongly recommend doing in the introduction-repeat
your points frequently so as to make them easily understood. What
you should do in your introduction is to state your subject, in order
that the point to be judged may be quite plain; in the epilogue you
should summarize the arguments by which your case has been proved.
The first step in this reviewing process is to observe that you have
done what you undertook to do. You must, then, state what you have
said and why you have said it. Your method may be a comparison of
your own case with that of your opponent; and you may compare either
the ways you have both handled the same point or make your comparison
less direct: 'My opponent said so-and-so on this point; I said so-and-so,
and this is why I said it'. Or with modest irony, e.g. 'He certainly
said so-and-so, but I said so-and-so'. Or 'How vain he would have
been if he had proved all this instead of that!' Or put it in the
form of a question. 'What has not been proved by me?' or 'What has
my opponent proved?' You may proceed then, either in this way by setting
point against point, or by following the natural order of the arguments
as spoken, first giving your own, and then separately, if you wish,
those of your opponent. 

For the conclusion, the disconnected style of language is appropriate,
and will mark the difference between the oration and the peroration.
'I have done. You have heard me. The facts are before you. I ask for
your judgement.' 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

Holding as we do that, while knowledge of any kind is a thing to
be honoured and prized, one kind of it may, either by reason of its
greater exactness or of a higher dignity and greater wonderfulness
in its objects, be more honourable and precious than another, on both
accounts we should naturally be led to place in the front rank the
study of the soul. The knowledge of the soul admittedly contributes
greatly to the advance of truth in general, and, above all, to our
understanding of Nature, for the soul is in some sense the principle
of animal life. Our aim is to grasp and understand, first its essential
nature, and secondly its properties; of these some are taught to be
affections proper to the soul itself, while others are considered
to attach to the animal owing to the presence within it of soul.

To attain any assured knowledge about the soul is one of the most
difficult things in the world. As the form of question which here
presents itself, viz. the question 'What is it?', recurs in other
fields, it might be supposed that there was some single method of
inquiry applicable to all objects whose essential nature (as we are
endeavouring to ascertain there is for derived properties the single
method of demonstration); in that case what we should have to seek
for would be this unique method. But if there is no such single and
general method for solving the question of essence, our task becomes
still more difficult; in the case of each different subject we shall
have to determine the appropriate process of investigation. If to
this there be a clear answer, e.g. that the process is demonstration
or division, or some known method, difficulties and hesitations still
beset us-with what facts shall we begin the inquiry? For the facts
which form the starting-points in different subjects must be different,
as e.g. in the case of numbers and surfaces. 

First, no doubt, it is necessary to determine in which of the summa
genera soul lies, what it is; is it 'a this-somewhat, 'a substance,
or is it a quale or a quantum, or some other of the remaining kinds
of predicates which we have distinguished? Further, does soul belong
to the class of potential existents, or is it not rather an actuality?
Our answer to this question is of the greatest importance.

We must consider also whether soul is divisible or is without parts,
and whether it is everywhere homogeneous or not; and if not homogeneous,
whether its various forms are different specifically or generically:
up to the present time those who have discussed and investigated soul
seem to have confined themselves to the human soul. We must be careful
not to ignore the question whether soul can be defined in a single
unambiguous formula, as is the case with animal, or whether we must
not give a separate formula for each of it, as we do for horse, dog,
man, god (in the latter case the 'universal' animal-and so too every
other 'common predicate'-being treated either as nothing at all or
as a later product). Further, if what exists is not a plurality of
souls, but a plurality of parts of one soul, which ought we to investigate
first, the whole soul or its parts? (It is also a difficult problem
to decide which of these parts are in nature distinct from one another.)
Again, which ought we to investigate first, these parts or their functions,
mind or thinking, the faculty or the act of sensation, and so on?
If the investigation of the functions precedes that of the parts,
the further question suggests itself: ought we not before either to
consider the correlative objects, e.g. of sense or thought? It seems
not only useful for the discovery of the causes of the derived properties
of substances to be acquainted with the essential nature of those
substances (as in mathematics it is useful for the understanding of
the property of the equality of the interior angles of a triangle
to two right angles to know the essential nature of the straight and
the curved or of the line and the plane) but also conversely, for
the knowledge of the essential nature of a substance is largely promoted
by an acquaintance with its properties: for, when we are able to give
an account conformable to experience of all or most of the properties
of a substance, we shall be in the most favourable position to say
something worth saying about the essential nature of that subject;
in all demonstration a definition of the essence is required as a
starting-point, so that definitions which do not enable us to discover
the derived properties, or which fail to facilitate even a conjecture
about them, must obviously, one and all, be dialectical and futile.

A further problem presented by the affections of soul is this: are
they all affections of the complex of body and soul, or is there any
one among them peculiar to the soul by itself? To determine this is
indispensable but difficult. If we consider the majority of them,
there seems to be no case in which the soul can act or be acted upon
without involving the body; e.g. anger, courage, appetite, and sensation
generally. Thinking seems the most probable exception; but if this
too proves to be a form of imagination or to be impossible without
imagination, it too requires a body as a condition of its existence.
If there is any way of acting or being acted upon proper to soul,
soul will be capable of separate existence; if there is none, its
separate existence is impossible. In the latter case, it will be like
what is straight, which has many properties arising from the straightness
in it, e.g. that of touching a bronze sphere at a point, though straightness
divorced from the other constituents of the straight thing cannot
touch it in this way; it cannot be so divorced at all, since it is
always found in a body. It therefore seems that all the affections
of soul involve a body-passion, gentleness, fear, pity, courage, joy,
loving, and hating; in all these there is a concurrent affection of
the body. In support of this we may point to the fact that, while
sometimes on the occasion of violent and striking occurrences there
is no excitement or fear felt, on others faint and feeble stimulations
produce these emotions, viz. when the body is already in a state of
tension resembling its condition when we are angry. Here is a still
clearer case: in the absence of any external cause of terror we find
ourselves experiencing the feelings of a man in terror. From all this
it is obvious that the affections of soul are enmattered formulable
essences. 

Consequently their definitions ought to correspond, e.g. anger should
be defined as a certain mode of movement of such and such a body (or
part or faculty of a body) by this or that cause and for this or that
end. That is precisely why the study of the soul must fall within
the science of Nature, at least so far as in its affections it manifests
this double character. Hence a physicist would define an affection
of soul differently from a dialectician; the latter would define e.g.
anger as the appetite for returning pain for pain, or something like
that, while the former would define it as a boiling of the blood or
warm substance surround the heart. The latter assigns the material
conditions, the former the form or formulable essence; for what he
states is the formulable essence of the fact, though for its actual
existence there must be embodiment of it in a material such as is
described by the other. Thus the essence of a house is assigned in
such a formula as 'a shelter against destruction by wind, rain, and
heat'; the physicist would describe it as 'stones, bricks, and timbers';
but there is a third possible description which would say that it
was that form in that material with that purpose or end. Which, then,
among these is entitled to be regarded as the genuine physicist? The
one who confines himself to the material, or the one who restricts
himself to the formulable essence alone? Is it not rather the one
who combines both in a single formula? If this is so, how are we to
characterize the other two? Must we not say that there is no type
of thinker who concerns himself with those qualities or attributes
of the material which are in fact inseparable from the material, and
without attempting even in thought to separate them? The physicist
is he who concerns himself with all the properties active and passive
of bodies or materials thus or thus defined; attributes not considered
as being of this character he leaves to others, in certain cases it
may be to a specialist, e.g. a carpenter or a physician, in others
(a) where they are inseparable in fact, but are separable from any
particular kind of body by an effort of abstraction, to the mathematician,
(b) where they are separate both in fact and in thought from body
altogether, to the First Philosopher or metaphysician. But we must
return from this digression, and repeat that the affections of soul
are inseparable from the material substratum of animal life, to which
we have seen that such affections, e.g. passion and fear, attach,
and have not the same mode of being as a line or a plane.

Part 2

For our study of soul it is necessary, while formulating the problems
of which in our further advance we are to find the solutions, to call
into council the views of those of our predecessors who have declared
any opinion on this subject, in order that we may profit by whatever
is sound in their suggestions and avoid their errors. 

The starting-point of our inquiry is an exposition of those characteristics
which have chiefly been held to belong to soul in its very nature.
Two characteristic marks have above all others been recognized as
distinguishing that which has soul in it from that which has not-movement
and sensation. It may be said that these two are what our predecessors
have fixed upon as characteristic of soul. 

Some say that what originates movement is both pre-eminently and primarily
soul; believing that what is not itself moved cannot originate movement
in another, they arrived at the view that soul belongs to the class
of things in movement. This is what led Democritus to say that soul
is a sort of fire or hot substance; his 'forms' or atoms are infinite
in number; those which are spherical he calls fire and soul, and compares
them to the motes in the air which we see in shafts of light coming
through windows; the mixture of seeds of all sorts he calls the elements
of the whole of Nature (Leucippus gives a similar account); the spherical
atoms are identified with soul because atoms of that shape are most
adapted to permeate everywhere, and to set all the others moving by
being themselves in movement. This implies the view that soul is identical
with what produces movement in animals. That is why, further, they
regard respiration as the characteristic mark of life; as the environment
compresses the bodies of animals, and tends to extrude those atoms
which impart movement to them, because they themselves are never at
rest, there must be a reinforcement of these by similar atoms coming
in from without in the act of respiration; for they prevent the extrusion
of those which are already within by counteracting the compressing
and consolidating force of the environment; and animals continue to
live only so long as they are able to maintain this resistance.

The doctrine of the Pythagoreans seems to rest upon the same ideas;
some of them declared the motes in air, others what moved them, to
be soul. These motes were referred to because they are seen always
in movement, even in a complete calm. 

The same tendency is shown by those who define soul as that which
moves itself; all seem to hold the view that movement is what is closest
to the nature of soul, and that while all else is moved by soul, it
alone moves itself. This belief arises from their never seeing anything
originating movement which is not first itself moved. 

Similarly also Anaxagoras (and whoever agrees with him in saying that
mind set the whole in movement) declares the moving cause of things
to be soul. His position must, however, be distinguished from that
of Democritus. Democritus roundly identifies soul and mind, for he
identifies what appears with what is true-that is why he commends
Homer for the phrase 'Hector lay with thought distraught'; he does
not employ mind as a special faculty dealing with truth, but identifies
soul and mind. What Anaxagoras says about them is more obscure; in
many places he tells us that the cause of beauty and order is mind,
elsewhere that it is soul; it is found, he says, in all animals, great
and small, high and low, but mind (in the sense of intelligence) appears
not to belong alike to all animals, and indeed not even to all human
beings. 

All those, then, who had special regard to the fact that what has
soul in it is moved, adopted the view that soul is to be identified
with what is eminently originative of movement. All, on the other
hand, who looked to the fact that what has soul in it knows or perceives
what is, identify soul with the principle or principles of Nature,
according as they admit several such principles or one only. Thus
Empedocles declares that it is formed out of all his elements, each
of them also being soul; his words are: 

For 'tis by Earth we see Earth, by Water Water, 
By Ether Ether divine, by Fire destructive Fire, 
By Love Love, and Hate by cruel Hate. 

In the same way Plato in the Timaeus fashions soul out of his elements;
for like, he holds, is known by like, and things are formed out of
the principles or elements, so that soul must be so too. Similarly
also in his lectures 'On Philosophy' it was set forth that the Animal-itself
is compounded of the Idea itself of the One together with the primary
length, breadth, and depth, everything else, the objects of its perception,
being similarly constituted. Again he puts his view in yet other terms:
Mind is the monad, science or knowledge the dyad (because it goes
undeviatingly from one point to another), opinion the number of the
plane, sensation the number of the solid; the numbers are by him expressly
identified with the Forms themselves or principles, and are formed
out of the elements; now things are apprehended either by mind or
science or opinion or sensation, and these same numbers are the Forms
of things. 

Some thinkers, accepting both premisses, viz. that the soul is both
originative of movement and cognitive, have compounded it of both
and declared the soul to be a self-moving number. 

As to the nature and number of the first principles opinions differ.
The difference is greatest between those who regard them as corporeal
and those who regard them as incorporeal, and from both dissent those
who make a blend and draw their principles from both sources. The
number of principles is also in dispute; some admit one only, others
assert several. There is a consequent diversity in their several accounts
of soul; they assume, naturally enough, that what is in its own nature
originative of movement must be among what is primordial. That has
led some to regard it as fire, for fire is the subtlest of the elements
and nearest to incorporeality; further, in the most primary sense,
fire both is moved and originates movement in all the others.

Democritus has expressed himself more ingeniously than the rest on
the grounds for ascribing each of these two characters to soul; soul
and mind are, he says, one and the same thing, and this thing must
be one of the primary and indivisible bodies, and its power of originating
movement must be due to its fineness of grain and the shape of its
atoms; he says that of all the shapes the spherical is the most mobile,
and that this is the shape of the particles of fire and mind.

Anaxagoras, as we said above, seems to distinguish between soul and
mind, but in practice he treats them as a single substance, except
that it is mind that he specially posits as the principle of all things;
at any rate what he says is that mind alone of all that is simple,
unmixed, and pure. He assigns both characteristics, knowing and origination
of movement, to the same principle, when he says that it was mind
that set the whole in movement. 

Thales, too, to judge from what is recorded about him, seems to have
held soul to be a motive force, since he said that the magnet has
a soul in it because it moves the iron. 

Diogenes (and others) held the soul to be air because he believed
air to be finest in grain and a first principle; therein lay the grounds
of the soul's powers of knowing and originating movement. As the primordial
principle from which all other things are derived, it is cognitive;
as finest in grain, it has the power to originate movement.

Heraclitus too says that the first principle-the 'warm exhalation'
of which, according to him, everything else is composed-is soul; further,
that this exhalation is most incorporeal and in ceaseless flux; that
what is in movement requires that what knows it should be in movement;
and that all that is has its being essentially in movement (herein
agreeing with the majority). 

Alcmaeon also seems to have held a similar view about soul; he says
that it is immortal because it resembles 'the immortals,' and that
this immortality belongs to it in virtue of its ceaseless movement;
for all the 'things divine,' moon, sun, the planets, and the whole
heavens, are in perpetual movement. 

of More superficial writers, some, e.g. Hippo, have pronounced it
to be water; they seem to have argued from the fact that the seed
of all animals is fluid, for Hippo tries to refute those who say that
the soul is blood, on the ground that the seed, which is the primordial
soul, is not blood. 

Another group (Critias, for example) did hold it to be blood; they
take perception to be the most characteristic attribute of soul, and
hold that perceptiveness is due to the nature of blood. 

Each of the elements has thus found its partisan, except earth-earth
has found no supporter unless we count as such those who have declared
soul to be, or to be compounded of, all the elements. All, then, it
may be said, characterize the soul by three marks, Movement, Sensation,
Incorporeality, and each of these is traced back to the first principles.
That is why (with one exception) all those who define the soul by
its power of knowing make it either an element or constructed out
of the elements. The language they all use is similar; like, they
say, is known by like; as the soul knows everything, they construct
it out of all the principles. Hence all those who admit but one cause
or element, make the soul also one (e.g. fire or air), while those
who admit a multiplicity of principles make the soul also multiple.
The exception is Anaxagoras; he alone says that mind is impassible
and has nothing in common with anything else. But, if this is so,
how or in virtue of what cause can it know? That Anaxagoras has not
explained, nor can any answer be inferred from his words. All who
acknowledge pairs of opposites among their principles, construct the
soul also out of these contraries, while those who admit as principles
only one contrary of each pair, e.g. either hot or cold, likewise
make the soul some one of these. That is why, also, they allow themselves
to be guided by the names; those who identify soul with the hot argue
that sen (to live) is derived from sein (to boil), while those who
identify it with the cold say that soul (psuche) is so called from
the process of respiration and (katapsuxis). Such are the traditional
opinions concerning soul, together with the grounds on which they
are maintained. 

Part 3

We must begin our examination with movement; for doubtless, not only
is it false that the essence of soul is correctly described by those
who say that it is what moves (or is capable of moving) itself, but
it is an impossibility that movement should be even an attribute of
it. 

We have already pointed out that there is no necessity that what originates
movement should itself be moved. There are two senses in which anything
may be moved-either (a) indirectly, owing to something other than
itself, or (b) directly, owing to itself. Things are 'indirectly moved'
which are moved as being contained in something which is moved, e.g.
sailors in a ship, for they are moved in a different sense from that
in which the ship is moved; the ship is 'directly moved', they are
'indirectly moved', because they are in a moving vessel. This is clear
if we consider their limbs; the movement proper to the legs (and so
to man) is walking, and in this case the sailors tare not walking.
Recognizing the double sense of 'being moved', what we have to consider
now is whether the soul is 'directly moved' and participates in such
direct movement. 

There are four species of movement-locomotion, alteration, diminution,
growth; consequently if the soul is moved, it must be moved with one
or several or all of these species of movement. Now if its movement
is not incidental, there must be a movement natural to it, and, if
so, as all the species enumerated involve place, place must be natural
to it. But if the essence of soul be to move itself, its being moved
cannot be incidental to-as it is to what is white or three cubits
long; they too can be moved, but only incidentally-what is moved is
that of which 'white' and 'three cubits long' are the attributes,
the body in which they inhere; hence they have no place: but if the
soul naturally partakes in movement, it follows that it must have
a place. 

Further, if there be a movement natural to the soul, there must be
a counter-movement unnatural to it, and conversely. The same applies
to rest as well as to movement; for the terminus ad quem of a thing's
natural movement is the place of its natural rest, and similarly the
terminus ad quem of its enforced movement is the place of its enforced
rest. But what meaning can be attached to enforced movements or rests
of the soul, it is difficult even to imagine. 

Further, if the natural movement of the soul be upward, the soul must
be fire; if downward, it must be earth; for upward and downward movements
are the definitory characteristics of these bodies. The same reasoning
applies to the intermediate movements, termini, and bodies. Further,
since the soul is observed to originate movement in the body, it is
reasonable to suppose that it transmits to the body the movements
by which it itself is moved, and so, reversing the order, we may infer
from the movements of the body back to similar movements of the soul.
Now the body is moved from place to place with movements of locomotion.
Hence it would follow that the soul too must in accordance with the
body change either its place as a whole or the relative places of
its parts. This carries with it the possibility that the soul might
even quit its body and re-enter it, and with this would be involved
the possibility of a resurrection of animals from the dead. But, it
may be contended, the soul can be moved indirectly by something else;
for an animal can be pushed out of its course. Yes, but that to whose
essence belongs the power of being moved by itself, cannot be moved
by something else except incidentally, just as what is good by or
in itself cannot owe its goodness to something external to it or to
some end to which it is a means. 

If the soul is moved, the most probable view is that what moves it
is sensible things. 

We must note also that, if the soul moves itself, it must be the mover
itself that is moved, so that it follows that if movement is in every
case a displacement of that which is in movement, in that respect
in which it is said to be moved, the movement of the soul must be
a departure from its essential nature, at least if its self-movement
is essential to it, not incidental. 

Some go so far as to hold that the movements which the soul imparts
to the body in which it is are the same in kind as those with which
it itself is moved. An example of this is Democritus, who uses language
like that of the comic dramatist Philippus, who accounts for the movements
that Daedalus imparted to his wooden Aphrodite by saying that he poured
quicksilver into it; similarly Democritus says that the spherical
atoms which according to him constitute soul, owing to their own ceaseless
movements draw the whole body after them and so produce its movements.
We must urge the question whether it is these very same atoms which
produce rest also-how they could do so, it is difficult and even impossible
to say. And, in general, we may object that it is not in this way
that the soul appears to originate movement in animals-it is through
intention or process of thinking. 

It is in the same fashion that the Timaeus also tries to give a physical
account of how the soul moves its body; the soul, it is there said,
is in movement, and so owing to their mutual implication moves the
body also. After compounding the soul-substance out of the elements
and dividing it in accordance with the harmonic numbers, in order
that it may possess a connate sensibility for 'harmony' and that the
whole may move in movements well attuned, the Demiurge bent the straight
line into a circle; this single circle he divided into two circles
united at two common points; one of these he subdivided into seven
circles. All this implies that the movements of the soul are identified
with the local movements of the heavens. 

Now, in the first place, it is a mistake to say that the soul is a
spatial magnitude. It is evident that Plato means the soul of the
whole to be like the sort of soul which is called mind not like the
sensitive or the desiderative soul, for the movements of neither of
these are circular. Now mind is one and continuous in the sense in
which the process of thinking is so, and thinking is identical with
the thoughts which are its parts; these have a serial unity like that
of number, not a unity like that of a spatial magnitude. Hence mind
cannot have that kind of unity either; mind is either without parts
or is continuous in some other way than that which characterizes a
spatial magnitude. How, indeed, if it were a spatial magnitude, could
mind possibly think? Will it think with any one indifferently of its
parts? In this case, the 'part' must be understood either in the sense
of a spatial magnitude or in the sense of a point (if a point can
be called a part of a spatial magnitude). If we accept the latter
alternative, the points being infinite in number, obviously the mind
can never exhaustively traverse them; if the former, the mind must
think the same thing over and over again, indeed an infinite number
of times (whereas it is manifestly possible to think a thing once
only). If contact of any part whatsoever of itself with the object
is all that is required, why need mind move in a circle, or indeed
possess magnitude at all? On the other hand, if contact with the whole
circle is necessary, what meaning can be given to the contact of the
parts? Further, how could what has no parts think what has parts,
or what has parts think what has none? We must identify the circle
referred to with mind; for it is mind whose movement is thinking,
and it is the circle whose movement is revolution, so that if thinking
is a movement of revolution, the circle which has this characteristic
movement must be mind. 

If the circular movement is eternal, there must be something which
mind is always thinking-what can this be? For all practical processes
of thinking have limits-they all go on for the sake of something outside
the process, and all theoretical processes come to a close in the
same way as the phrases in speech which express processes and results
of thinking. Every such linguistic phrase is either definitory or
demonstrative. Demonstration has both a starting-point and may be
said to end in a conclusion or inferred result; even if the process
never reaches final completion, at any rate it never returns upon
itself again to its starting-point, it goes on assuming a fresh middle
term or a fresh extreme, and moves straight forward, but circular
movement returns to its starting-point. Definitions, too, are closed
groups of terms. 

Further, if the same revolution is repeated, mind must repeatedly
think the same object. 

Further, thinking has more resemblance to a coming to rest or arrest
than to a movement; the same may be said of inferring. 

It might also be urged that what is difficult and enforced is incompatible
with blessedness; if the movement of the soul is not of its essence,
movement of the soul must be contrary to its nature. It must also
be painful for the soul to be inextricably bound up with the body;
nay more, if, as is frequently said and widely accepted, it is better
for mind not to be embodied, the union must be for it undesirable.

Further, the cause of the revolution of the heavens is left obscure.
It is not the essence of soul which is the cause of this circular
movement-that movement is only incidental to soul-nor is, a fortiori,
the body its cause. Again, it is not even asserted that it is better
that soul should be so moved; and yet the reason for which God caused
the soul to move in a circle can only have been that movement was
better for it than rest, and movement of this kind better than any
other. But since this sort of consideration is more appropriate to
another field of speculation, let us dismiss it for the present.

The view we have just been examining, in company with most theories
about the soul, involves the following absurdity: they all join the
soul to a body, or place it in a body, without adding any specification
of the reason of their union, or of the bodily conditions required
for it. Yet such explanation can scarcely be omitted; for some community
of nature is presupposed by the fact that the one acts and the other
is acted upon, the one moves and the other is moved; interaction always
implies a special nature in the two interagents. All, however, that
these thinkers do is to describe the specific characteristics of the
soul; they do not try to determine anything about the body which is
to contain it, as if it were possible, as in the Pythagorean myths,
that any soul could be clothed upon with any body-an absurd view,
for each body seems to have a form and shape of its own. It is as
absurd as to say that the art of carpentry could embody itself in
flutes; each art must use its tools, each soul its body.

Part 4

There is yet another theory about soul, which has commended itself
to many as no less probable than any of those we have hitherto mentioned,
and has rendered public account of itself in the court of popular
discussion. Its supporters say that the soul is a kind of harmony,
for (a) harmony is a blend or composition of contraries, and (b) the
body is compounded out of contraries. Harmony, however, is a certain
proportion or composition of the constituents blended, and soul can
be neither the one nor the other of these. Further, the power of originating
movement cannot belong to a harmony, while almost all concur in regarding
this as a principal attribute of soul. It is more appropriate to call
health (or generally one of the good states of the body) a harmony
than to predicate it of the soul. The absurdity becomes most apparent
when we try to attribute the active and passive affections of the
soul to a harmony; the necessary readjustment of their conceptions
is difficult. Further, in using the word 'harmony' we have one or
other of two cases in our mind; the most proper sense is in relation
to spatial magnitudes which have motion and position, where harmony
means the disposition and cohesion of their parts in such a manner
as to prevent the introduction into the whole of anything homogeneous
with it, and the secondary sense, derived from the former, is that
in which it means the ratio between the constituents so blended; in
neither of these senses is it plausible to predicate it of soul. That
soul is a harmony in the sense of the mode of composition of the parts
of the body is a view easily refutable; for there are many composite
parts and those variously compounded; of what bodily part is mind
or the sensitive or the appetitive faculty the mode of composition?
And what is the mode of composition which constitutes each of them?
It is equally absurd to identify the soul with the ratio of the mixture;
for the mixture which makes flesh has a different ratio between the
elements from that which makes bone. The consequence of this view
will therefore be that distributed throughout the whole body there
will be many souls, since every one of the bodily parts is a different
mixture of the elements, and the ratio of mixture is in each case
a harmony, i.e. a soul. 

From Empedocles at any rate we might demand an answer to the following
question for he says that each of the parts of the body is what it
is in virtue of a ratio between the elements: is the soul identical
with this ratio, or is it not rather something over and above this
which is formed in the parts? Is love the cause of any and every mixture,
or only of those that are in the right ratio? Is love this ratio itself,
or is love something over and above this? Such are the problems raised
by this account. But, on the other hand, if the soul is different
from the mixture, why does it disappear at one and the same moment
with that relation between the elements which constitutes flesh or
the other parts of the animal body? Further, if the soul is not identical
with the ratio of mixture, and it is consequently not the case that
each of the parts has a soul, what is that which perishes when the
soul quits the body? 

That the soul cannot either be a harmony, or be moved in a circle,
is clear from what we have said. Yet that it can be moved incidentally
is, as we said above, possible, and even that in a sense it can move
itself, i.e. in the sense that the vehicle in which it is can be moved,
and moved by it; in no other sense can the soul be moved in space.

More legitimate doubts might remain as to its movement in view of
the following facts. We speak of the soul as being pained or pleased,
being bold or fearful, being angry, perceiving, thinking. All these
are regarded as modes of movement, and hence it might be inferred
that the soul is moved. This, however, does not necessarily follow.
We may admit to the full that being pained or pleased, or thinking,
are movements (each of them a 'being moved'), and that the movement
is originated by the soul. For example we may regard anger or fear
as such and such movements of the heart, and thinking as such and
such another movement of that organ, or of some other; these modifications
may arise either from changes of place in certain parts or from qualitative
alterations (the special nature of the parts and the special modes
of their changes being for our present purpose irrelevant). Yet to
say that it is the soul which is angry is as inexact as it would be
to say that it is the soul that weaves webs or builds houses. It is
doubtless better to avoid saying that the soul pities or learns or
thinks and rather to say that it is the man who does this with his
soul. What we mean is not that the movement is in the soul, but that
sometimes it terminates in the soul and sometimes starts from it,
sensation e.g. coming from without inwards, and reminiscence starting
from the soul and terminating with the movements, actual or residual,
in the sense organs. 

The case of mind is different; it seems to be an independent substance
implanted within the soul and to be incapable of being destroyed.
If it could be destroyed at all, it would be under the blunting influence
of old age. What really happens in respect of mind in old age is,
however, exactly parallel to what happens in the case of the sense
organs; if the old man could recover the proper kind of eye, he would
see just as well as the young man. The incapacity of old age is due
to an affection not of the soul but of its vehicle, as occurs in drunkenness
or disease. Thus it is that in old age the activity of mind or intellectual
apprehension declines only through the decay of some other inward
part; mind itself is impassible. Thinking, loving, and hating are
affections not of mind, but of that which has mind, so far as it has
it. That is why, when this vehicle decays, memory and love cease;
they were activities not of mind, but of the composite which has perished;
mind is, no doubt, something more divine and impassible. That the
soul cannot be moved is therefore clear from what we have said, and
if it cannot be moved at all, manifestly it cannot be moved by itself.

Of all the opinions we have enumerated, by far the most unreasonable
is that which declares the soul to be a self-moving number; it involves
in the first place all the impossibilities which follow from regarding
the soul as moved, and in the second special absurdities which follow
from calling it a number. How we to imagine a unit being moved? By
what agency? What sort of movement can be attributed to what is without
parts or internal differences? If the unit is both originative of
movement and itself capable of being moved, it must contain difference.

Further, since they say a moving line generates a surface and a moving
point a line, the movements of the psychic units must be lines (for
a point is a unit having position, and the number of the soul is,
of course, somewhere and has position). 

Again, if from a number a number or a unit is subtracted, the remainder
is another number; but plants and many animals when divided continue
to live, and each segment is thought to retain the same kind of soul.

It must be all the same whether we speak of units or corpuscles; for
if the spherical atoms of Democritus became points, nothing being
retained but their being a quantum, there must remain in each a moving
and a moved part, just as there is in what is continuous; what happens
has nothing to do with the size of the atoms, it depends solely upon
their being a quantum. That is why there must be something to originate
movement in the units. If in the animal what originates movement is
the soul, so also must it be in the case of the number, so that not
the mover and the moved together, but the mover only, will be the
soul. But how is it possible for one of the units to fulfil this function
of originating movement? There must be some difference between such
a unit and all the other units, and what difference can there be between
one placed unit and another except a difference of position? If then,
on the other hand, these psychic units within the body are different
from the points of the body, there will be two sets of units both
occupying the same place; for each unit will occupy a point. And yet,
if there can be two, why cannot there be an infinite number? For if
things can occupy an indivisible lace, they must themselves be indivisible.
If, on the other hand, the points of the body are identical with the
units whose number is the soul, or if the number of the points in
the body is the soul, why have not all bodies souls? For all bodies
contain points or an infinity of points. 

Further, how is it possible for these points to be isolated or separated
from their bodies, seeing that lines cannot be resolved into points?

Part 5

The result is, as we have said, that this view, while on the one side
identical with that of those who maintain that soul is a subtle kind
of body, is on the other entangled in the absurdity peculiar to Democritus'
way of describing the manner in which movement is originated by soul.
For if the soul is present throughout the whole percipient body, there
must, if the soul be a kind of body, be two bodies in the same place;
and for those who call it a number, there must be many points at one
point, or every body must have a soul, unless the soul be a different
sort of number-other, that is, than the sum of the points existing
in a body. Another consequence that follows is that the animal must
be moved by its number precisely in the way that Democritus explained
its being moved by his spherical psychic atoms. What difference does
it make whether we speak of small spheres or of large units, or, quite
simply, of units in movement? One way or another, the movements of
the animal must be due to their movements. Hence those who combine
movement and number in the same subject lay themselves open to these
and many other similar absurdities. It is impossible not only that
these characters should give the definition of soul-it is impossible
that they should even be attributes of it. The point is clear if the
attempt be made to start from this as the account of soul and explain
from it the affections and actions of the soul, e.g. reasoning, sensation,
pleasure, pain, &c. For, to repeat what we have said earlier, movement
and number do not facilitate even conjecture about the derivative
properties of soul. 

Such are the three ways in which soul has traditionally been defined;
one group of thinkers declared it to be that which is most originative
of movement because it moves itself, another group to be the subtlest
and most nearly incorporeal of all kinds of body. We have now sufficiently
set forth the difficulties and inconsistencies to which these theories
are exposed. It remains now to examine the doctrine that soul is composed
of the elements. 

The reason assigned for this doctrine is that thus the soul may perceive
or come to know everything that is, but the theory necessarily involves
itself in many impossibilities. Its upholders assume that like is
known only by like, and imagine that by declaring the soul to be composed
of the elements they succeed in identifying the soul with all the
things it is capable of apprehending. But the elements are not the
only things it knows; there are many others, or, more exactly, an
infinite number of others, formed out of the elements. Let us admit
that the soul knows or perceives the elements out of which each of
these composites is made up; but by what means will it know or perceive
the composite whole, e.g. what God, man, flesh, bone (or any other
compound) is? For each is, not merely the elements of which it is
composed, but those elements combined in a determinate mode or ratio,
as Empedocles himself says of bone, 

The kindly Earth in its broad-bosomed moulds 

Won of clear Water two parts out of eight, And four of Fire; and so
white bones were formed. 

Nothing, therefore, will be gained by the presence of the elements
in the soul, unless there be also present there the various formulae
of proportion and the various compositions in accordance with them.
Each element will indeed know its fellow outside, but there will be
no knowledge of bone or man, unless they too are present in the constitution
of the soul. The impossibility of this needs no pointing out; for
who would suggest that stone or man could enter into the constitution
of the soul? The same applies to 'the good' and 'the not-good', and
so on. 

Further, the word 'is' has many meanings: it may be used of a 'this'
or substance, or of a quantum, or of a quale, or of any other of the
kinds of predicates we have distinguished. Does the soul consist of
all of these or not? It does not appear that all have common elements.
Is the soul formed out of those elements alone which enter into substances?
so how will it be able to know each of the other kinds of thing? Will
it be said that each kind of thing has elements or principles of its
own, and that the soul is formed out of the whole of these? In that
case, the soul must be a quantum and a quale and a substance. But
all that can be made out of the elements of a quantum is a quantum,
not a substance. These (and others like them) are the consequences
of the view that the soul is composed of all the elements.

It is absurd, also, to say both (a) that like is not capable of being
affected by like, and (b) that like is perceived or known by like,
for perceiving, and also both thinking and knowing, are, on their
own assumption, ways of being affected or moved. 

There are many puzzles and difficulties raised by saying, as Empedocles
does, that each set of things is known by means of its corporeal elements
and by reference to something in soul which is like them, and additional
testimony is furnished by this new consideration; for all the parts
of the animal body which consist wholly of earth such as bones, sinews,
and hair seem to be wholly insensitive and consequently not perceptive
even of objects earthy like themselves, as they ought to have been.

Further, each of the principles will have far more ignorance than
knowledge, for though each of them will know one thing, there will
be many of which it will be ignorant. Empedocles at any rate must
conclude that his God is the least intelligent of all beings, for
of him alone is it true that there is one thing, Strife, which he
does not know, while there is nothing which mortal beings do not know,
for ere is nothing which does not enter into their composition.

In general, we may ask, Why has not everything a soul, since everything
either is an element, or is formed out of one or several or all of
the elements? Each must certainly know one or several or all.

The problem might also be raised, What is that which unifies the elements
into a soul? The elements correspond, it would appear, to the matter;
what unites them, whatever it is, is the supremely important factor.
But it is impossible that there should be something superior to, and
dominant over, the soul (and a fortiori over the mind); it is reasonable
to hold that mind is by nature most primordial and dominant, while
their statement that it is the elements which are first of all that
is. 

All, both those who assert that the soul, because of its knowledge
or perception of what is compounded out of the elements, and is those
who assert that it is of all things the most originative of movement,
fail to take into consideration all kinds of soul. In fact (1) not
all beings that perceive can originate movement; there appear to be
certain animals which stationary, and yet local movement is the only
one, so it seems, which the soul originates in animals. And (2) the
same object-on holds against all those who construct mind and the
perceptive faculty out of the elements; for it appears that plants
live, and yet are not endowed with locomotion or perception, while
a large number of animals are without discourse of reason. Even if
these points were waived and mind admitted to be a part of the soul
(and so too the perceptive faculty), still, even so, there would be
kinds and parts of soul of which they had failed to give any account.

The same objection lies against the view expressed in the 'Orphic'
poems: there it is said that the soul comes in from the whole when
breathing takes place, being borne in upon the winds. Now this cannot
take place in the case of plants, nor indeed in the case of certain
classes of animal, for not all classes of animal breathe. This fact
has escaped the notice of the holders of this view. 

If we must construct the soul out of the elements, there is no necessity
to suppose that all the elements enter into its construction; one
element in each pair of contraries will suffice to enable it to know
both that element itself and its contrary. By means of the straight
line we know both itself and the curved-the carpenter's rule enables
us to test both-but what is curved does not enable us to distinguish
either itself or the straight. Certain thinkers say that soul is intermingled
in the whole universe, and it is perhaps for that reason that Thales
came to the opinion that all things are full of gods. This presents
some difficulties: Why does the soul when it resides in air or fire
not form an animal, while it does so when it resides in mixtures of
the elements, and that although it is held to be of higher quality
when contained in the former? (One might add the question, why the
soul in air is maintained to be higher and more immortal than that
in animals.) Both possible ways of replying to the former question
lead to absurdity or paradox; for it is beyond paradox to say that
fire or air is an animal, and it is absurd to refuse the name of animal
to what has soul in it. The opinion that the elements have soul in
them seems to have arisen from the doctrine that a whole must be homogeneous
with its parts. If it is true that animals become animate by drawing
into themselves a portion of what surrounds them, the partisans of
this view are bound to say that the soul of the Whole too is homogeneous
with all its parts. If the air sucked in is homogeneous, but soul
heterogeneous, clearly while some part of soul will exist in the inbreathed
air, some other part will not. The soul must either be homogeneous,
or such that there are some parts of the Whole in which it is not
to be found. 

From what has been said it is now clear that knowing as an attribute
of soul cannot be explained by soul's being composed of the elements,
and that it is neither sound nor true to speak of soul as moved. But
since (a) knowing, perceiving, opining, and further (b) desiring,
wishing, and generally all other modes of appetition, belong to soul,
and (c) the local movements of animals, and (d) growth, maturity,
and decay are produced by the soul, we must ask whether each of these
is an attribute of the soul as a whole, i.e. whether it is with the
whole soul we think, perceive, move ourselves, act or are acted upon,
or whether each of them requires a different part of the soul? So
too with regard to life. Does it depend on one of the parts of soul?
Or is it dependent on more than one? Or on all? Or has it some quite
other cause? 

Some hold that the soul is divisible, and that one part thinks, another
desires. If, then, its nature admits of its being divided, what can
it be that holds the parts together? Surely not the body; on the contrary
it seems rather to be the soul that holds the body together; at any
rate when the soul departs the body disintegrates and decays. If,
then, there is something else which makes the soul one, this unifying
agency would have the best right to the name of soul, and we shall
have to repeat for it the question: Is it one or multipartite? If
it is one, why not at once admit that 'the soul' is one? If it has
parts, once more the question must be put: What holds its parts together,
and so ad infinitum? 

The question might also be raised about the parts of the soul: What
is the separate role of each in relation to the body? For, if the
whole soul holds together the whole body, we should expect each part
of the soul to hold together a part of the body. But this seems an
impossibility; it is difficult even to imagine what sort of bodily
part mind will hold together, or how it will do this. 

It is a fact of observation that plants and certain insects go on
living when divided into segments; this means that each of the segments
has a soul in it identical in species, though not numerically identical
in the different segments, for both of the segments for a time possess
the power of sensation and local movement. That this does not last
is not surprising, for they no longer possess the organs necessary
for self-maintenance. But, all the same, in each of the bodily parts
there are present all the parts of soul, and the souls so present
are homogeneous with one another and with the whole; this means that
the several parts of the soul are indisseverable from one another,
although the whole soul is divisible. It seems also that the principle
found in plants is also a kind of soul; for this is the only principle
which is common to both animals and plants; and this exists in isolation
from the principle of sensation, though there nothing which has the
latter without the former. 



BOOK II

Part 1 

Let the foregoing suffice as our account of the views concerning
the soul which have been handed on by our predecessors; let us now
dismiss them and make as it were a completely fresh start, endeavouring
to give a precise answer to the question, What is soul? i.e. to formulate
the most general possible definition of it. 

We are in the habit of recognizing, as one determinate kind of what
is, substance, and that in several senses, (a) in the sense of matter
or that which in itself is not 'a this', and (b) in the sense of form
or essence, which is that precisely in virtue of which a thing is
called 'a this', and thirdly (c) in the sense of that which is compounded
of both (a) and (b). Now matter is potentiality, form actuality; of
the latter there are two grades related to one another as e.g. knowledge
to the exercise of knowledge. 

Among substances are by general consent reckoned bodies and especially
natural bodies; for they are the principles of all other bodies. Of
natural bodies some have life in them, others not; by life we mean
self-nutrition and growth (with its correlative decay). It follows
that every natural body which has life in it is a substance in the
sense of a composite. 

But since it is also a body of such and such a kind, viz. having life,
the body cannot be soul; the body is the subject or matter, not what
is attributed to it. Hence the soul must be a substance in the sense
of the form of a natural body having life potentially within it. But
substance is actuality, and thus soul is the actuality of a body as
above characterized. Now the word actuality has two senses corresponding
respectively to the possession of knowledge and the actual exercise
of knowledge. It is obvious that the soul is actuality in the first
sense, viz. that of knowledge as possessed, for both sleeping and
waking presuppose the existence of soul, and of these waking corresponds
to actual knowing, sleeping to knowledge possessed but not employed,
and, in the history of the individual, knowledge comes before its
employment or exercise. 

That is why the soul is the first grade of actuality of a natural
body having life potentially in it. The body so described is a body
which is organized. The parts of plants in spite of their extreme
simplicity are 'organs'; e.g. the leaf serves to shelter the pericarp,
the pericarp to shelter the fruit, while the roots of plants are analogous
to the mouth of animals, both serving for the absorption of food.
If, then, we have to give a general formula applicable to all kinds
of soul, we must describe it as the first grade of actuality of a
natural organized body. That is why we can wholly dismiss as unnecessary
the question whether the soul and the body are one: it is as meaningless
as to ask whether the wax and the shape given to it by the stamp are
one, or generally the matter of a thing and that of which it is the
matter. Unity has many senses (as many as 'is' has), but the most
proper and fundamental sense of both is the relation of an actuality
to that of which it is the actuality. We have now given an answer
to the question, What is soul?-an answer which applies to it in its
full extent. It is substance in the sense which corresponds to the
definitive formula of a thing's essence. That means that it is 'the
essential whatness' of a body of the character just assigned. Suppose
that what is literally an 'organ', like an axe, were a natural body,
its 'essential whatness', would have been its essence, and so its
soul; if this disappeared from it, it would have ceased to be an axe,
except in name. As it is, it is just an axe; it wants the character
which is required to make its whatness or formulable essence a soul;
for that, it would have had to be a natural body of a particular kind,
viz. one having in itself the power of setting itself in movement
and arresting itself. Next, apply this doctrine in the case of the
'parts' of the living body. Suppose that the eye were an animal-sight
would have been its soul, for sight is the substance or essence of
the eye which corresponds to the formula, the eye being merely the
matter of seeing; when seeing is removed the eye is no longer an eye,
except in name-it is no more a real eye than the eye of a statue or
of a painted figure. We must now extend our consideration from the
'parts' to the whole living body; for what the departmental sense
is to the bodily part which is its organ, that the whole faculty of
sense is to the whole sensitive body as such. 

We must not understand by that which is 'potentially capable of living'
what has lost the soul it had, but only what still retains it; but
seeds and fruits are bodies which possess the qualification. Consequently,
while waking is actuality in a sense corresponding to the cutting
and the seeing, the soul is actuality in the sense corresponding to
the power of sight and the power in the tool; the body corresponds
to what exists in potentiality; as the pupil plus the power of sight
constitutes the eye, so the soul plus the body constitutes the animal.

From this it indubitably follows that the soul is inseparable from
its body, or at any rate that certain parts of it are (if it has parts)
for the actuality of some of them is nothing but the actualities of
their bodily parts. Yet some may be separable because they are not
the actualities of any body at all. Further, we have no light on the
problem whether the soul may not be the actuality of its body in the
sense in which the sailor is the actuality of the ship. 

This must suffice as our sketch or outline determination of the nature
of soul. 

Part 2

Since what is clear or logically more evident emerges from what in
itself is confused but more observable by us, we must reconsider our
results from this point of view. For it is not enough for a definitive
formula to express as most now do the mere fact; it must include and
exhibit the ground also. At present definitions are given in a form
analogous to the conclusion of a syllogism; e.g. What is squaring?
The construction of an equilateral rectangle equal to a given oblong
rectangle. Such a definition is in form equivalent to a conclusion.
One that tells us that squaring is the discovery of a line which is
a mean proportional between the two unequal sides of the given rectangle
discloses the ground of what is defined. 

We resume our inquiry from a fresh starting-point by calling attention
to the fact that what has soul in it differs from what has not, in
that the former displays life. Now this word has more than one sense,
and provided any one alone of these is found in a thing we say that
thing is living. Living, that is, may mean thinking or perception
or local movement and rest, or movement in the sense of nutrition,
decay and growth. Hence we think of plants also as living, for they
are observed to possess in themselves an originative power through
which they increase or decrease in all spatial directions; they grow
up and down, and everything that grows increases its bulk alike in
both directions or indeed in all, and continues to live so long as
it can absorb nutriment. 

This power of self-nutrition can be isolated from the other powers
mentioned, but not they from it-in mortal beings at least. The fact
is obvious in plants; for it is the only psychic power they possess.

This is the originative power the possession of which leads us to
speak of things as living at all, but it is the possession of sensation
that leads us for the first time to speak of living things as animals;
for even those beings which possess no power of local movement but
do possess the power of sensation we call animals and not merely living
things. 

The primary form of sense is touch, which belongs to all animals.
just as the power of self-nutrition can be isolated from touch and
sensation generally, so touch can be isolated from all other forms
of sense. (By the power of self-nutrition we mean that departmental
power of the soul which is common to plants and animals: all animals
whatsoever are observed to have the sense of touch.) What the explanation
of these two facts is, we must discuss later. At present we must confine
ourselves to saying that soul is the source of these phenomena and
is characterized by them, viz. by the powers of self-nutrition, sensation,
thinking, and motivity. 

Is each of these a soul or a part of a soul? And if a part, a part
in what sense? A part merely distinguishable by definition or a part
distinct in local situation as well? In the case of certain of these
powers, the answers to these questions are easy, in the case of others
we are puzzled what to say. just as in the case of plants which when
divided are observed to continue to live though removed to a distance
from one another (thus showing that in their case the soul of each
individual plant before division was actually one, potentially many),
so we notice a similar result in other varieties of soul, i.e. in
insects which have been cut in two; each of the segments possesses
both sensation and local movement; and if sensation, necessarily also
imagination and appetition; for, where there is sensation, there is
also pleasure and pain, and, where these, necessarily also desire.

We have no evidence as yet about mind or the power to think; it seems
to be a widely different kind of soul, differing as what is eternal
from what is perishable; it alone is capable of existence in isolation
from all other psychic powers. All the other parts of soul, it is
evident from what we have said, are, in spite of certain statements
to the contrary, incapable of separate existence though, of course,
distinguishable by definition. If opining is distinct from perceiving,
to be capable of opining and to be capable of perceiving must be distinct,
and so with all the other forms of living above enumerated. Further,
some animals possess all these parts of soul, some certain of them
only, others one only (this is what enables us to classify animals);
the cause must be considered later.' A similar arrangement is found
also within the field of the senses; some classes of animals have
all the senses, some only certain of them, others only one, the most
indispensable, touch. 

Since the expression 'that whereby we live and perceive' has two meanings,
just like the expression 'that whereby we know'-that may mean either
(a) knowledge or (b) the soul, for we can speak of knowing by or with
either, and similarly that whereby we are in health may be either
(a) health or (b) the body or some part of the body; and since of
the two terms thus contrasted knowledge or health is the name of a
form, essence, or ratio, or if we so express it an actuality of a
recipient matter-knowledge of what is capable of knowing, health of
what is capable of being made healthy (for the operation of that which
is capable of originating change terminates and has its seat in what
is changed or altered); further, since it is the soul by or with which
primarily we live, perceive, and think:-it follows that the soul must
be a ratio or formulable essence, not a matter or subject. For, as
we said, word substance has three meanings form, matter, and the complex
of both and of these three what is called matter is potentiality,
what is called form actuality. Since then the complex here is the
living thing, the body cannot be the actuality of the soul; it is
the soul which is the actuality of a certain kind of body. Hence the
rightness of the view that the soul cannot be without a body, while
it csnnot he a body; it is not a body but something relative to a
body. That is why it is in a body, and a body of a definite kind.
It was a mistake, therefore, to do as former thinkers did, merely
to fit it into a body without adding a definite specification of the
kind or character of that body. Reflection confirms the observed fact;
the actuality of any given thing can only be realized in what is already
potentially that thing, i.e. in a matter of its own appropriate to
it. From all this it follows that soul is an actuality or formulable
essence of something that possesses a potentiality of being besouled.

Part 3

Of the psychic powers above enumerated some kinds of living things,
as we have said, possess all, some less than all, others one only.
Those we have mentioned are the nutritive, the appetitive, the sensory,
the locomotive, and the power of thinking. Plants have none but the
first, the nutritive, while another order of living things has this
plus the sensory. If any order of living things has the sensory, it
must also have the appetitive; for appetite is the genus of which
desire, passion, and wish are the species; now all animals have one
sense at least, viz. touch, and whatever has a sense has the capacity
for pleasure and pain and therefore has pleasant and painful objects
present to it, and wherever these are present, there is desire, for
desire is just appetition of what is pleasant. Further, all animals
have the sense for food (for touch is the sense for food); the food
of all living things consists of what is dry, moist, hot, cold, and
these are the qualities apprehended by touch; all other sensible qualities
are apprehended by touch only indirectly. Sounds, colours, and odours
contribute nothing to nutriment; flavours fall within the field of
tangible qualities. Hunger and thirst are forms of desire, hunger
a desire for what is dry and hot, thirst a desire for what is cold
and moist; flavour is a sort of seasoning added to both. We must later
clear up these points, but at present it may be enough to say that
all animals that possess the sense of touch have also appetition.
The case of imagination is obscure; we must examine it later. Certain
kinds of animals possess in addition the power of locomotion, and
still another order of animate beings, i.e. man and possibly another
order like man or superior to him, the power of thinking, i.e. mind.
It is now evident that a single definition can be given of soul only
in the same sense as one can be given of figure. For, as in that case
there is no figure distinguishable and apart from triangle, &c., so
here there is no soul apart from the forms of soul just enumerated.
It is true that a highly general definition can be given for figure
which will fit all figures without expressing the peculiar nature
of any figure. So here in the case of soul and its specific forms.
Hence it is absurd in this and similar cases to demand an absolutely
general definition which will fail to express the peculiar nature
of anything that is, or again, omitting this, to look for separate
definitions corresponding to each infima species. The cases of figure
and soul are exactly parallel; for the particulars subsumed under
the common name in both cases-figures and living beings-constitute
a series, each successive term of which potentially contains its predecessor,
e.g. the square the triangle, the sensory power the self-nutritive.
Hence we must ask in the case of each order of living things, What
is its soul, i.e. What is the soul of plant, animal, man? Why the
terms are related in this serial way must form the subject of later
examination. But the facts are that the power of perception is never
found apart from the power of self-nutrition, while-in plants-the
latter is found isolated from the former. Again, no sense is found
apart from that of touch, while touch is found by itself; many animals
have neither sight, hearing, nor smell. Again, among living things
that possess sense some have the power of locomotion, some not. Lastly,
certain living beings-a small minority-possess calculation and thought,
for (among mortal beings) those which possess calculation have all
the other powers above mentioned, while the converse does not hold-indeed
some live by imagination alone, while others have not even imagination.
The mind that knows with immediate intuition presents a different
problem. 

It is evident that the way to give the most adequate definition of
soul is to seek in the case of each of its forms for the most appropriate
definition. 

Part 4

It is necessary for the student of these forms of soul first to find
a definition of each, expressive of what it is, and then to investigate
its derivative properties, &c. But if we are to express what each
is, viz. what the thinking power is, or the perceptive, or the nutritive,
we must go farther back and first give an account of thinking or perceiving,
for in the order of investigation the question of what an agent does
precedes the question, what enables it to do what it does. If this
is correct, we must on the same ground go yet another step farther
back and have some clear view of the objects of each; thus we must
start with these objects, e.g. with food, with what is perceptible,
or with what is intelligible. 

It follows that first of all we must treat of nutrition and reproduction,
for the nutritive soul is found along with all the others and is the
most primitive and widely distributed power of soul, being indeed
that one in virtue of which all are said to have life. The acts in
which it manifests itself are reproduction and the use of food-reproduction,
I say, because for any living thing that has reached its normal development
and which is unmutilated, and whose mode of generation is not spontaneous,
the most natural act is the production of another like itself, an
animal producing an animal, a plant a plant, in order that, as far
as its nature allows, it may partake in the eternal and divine. That
is the goal towards which all things strive, that for the sake of
which they do whatsoever their nature renders possible. The phrase
'for the sake of which' is ambiguous; it may mean either (a) the end
to achieve which, or (b) the being in whose interest, the act is done.
Since then no living thing is able to partake in what is eternal and
divine by uninterrupted continuance (for nothing perishable can for
ever remain one and the same), it tries to achieve that end in the
only way possible to it, and success is possible in varying degrees;
so it remains not indeed as the self-same individual but continues
its existence in something like itself-not numerically but specifically
one. 

The soul is the cause or source of the living body. The terms cause
and source have many senses. But the soul is the cause of its body
alike in all three senses which we explicitly recognize. It is (a)
the source or origin of movement, it is (b) the end, it is (c) the
essence of the whole living body. 

That it is the last, is clear; for in everything the essence is identical
with the ground of its being, and here, in the case of living things,
their being is to live, and of their being and their living the soul
in them is the cause or source. Further, the actuality of whatever
is potential is identical with its formulable essence. 

It is manifest that the soul is also the final cause of its body.
For Nature, like mind, always does whatever it does for the sake of
something, which something is its end. To that something corresponds
in the case of animals the soul and in this it follows the order of
nature; all natural bodies are organs of the soul. This is true of
those that enter into the constitution of plants as well as of those
which enter into that of animals. This shows that that the sake of
which they are is soul. We must here recall the two senses of 'that
for the sake of which', viz. (a) the end to achieve which, and (b)
the being in whose interest, anything is or is done. 

We must maintain, further, that the soul is also the cause of the
living body as the original source of local movement. The power of
locomotion is not found, however, in all living things. But change
of quality and change of quantity are also due to the soul. Sensation
is held to be a qualitative alteration, and nothing except what has
soul in it is capable of sensation. The same holds of the quantitative
changes which constitute growth and decay; nothing grows or decays
naturally except what feeds itself, and nothing feeds itself except
what has a share of soul in it. 

Empedocles is wrong in adding that growth in plants is to be explained,
the downward rooting by the natural tendency of earth to travel downwards,
and the upward branching by the similar natural tendency of fire to
travel upwards. For he misinterprets up and down; up and down are
not for all things what they are for the whole Cosmos: if we are to
distinguish and identify organs according to their functions, the
roots of plants are analogous to the head in animals. Further, we
must ask what is the force that holds together the earth and the fire
which tend to travel in contrary directions; if there is no counteracting
force, they will be torn asunder; if there is, this must be the soul
and the cause of nutrition and growth. By some the element of fire
is held to be the cause of nutrition and growth, for it alone of the
primary bodies or elements is observed to feed and increase itself.
Hence the suggestion that in both plants and animals it is it which
is the operative force. A concurrent cause in a sense it certainly
is, but not the principal cause, that is rather the soul; for while
the growth of fire goes on without limit so long as there is a supply
of fuel, in the case of all complex wholes formed in the course of
nature there is a limit or ratio which determines their size and increase,
and limit and ratio are marks of soul but not of fire, and belong
to the side of formulable essence rather than that of matter.

Nutrition and reproduction are due to one and the same psychic power.
It is necessary first to give precision to our account of food, for
it is by this function of absorbing food that this psychic power is
distinguished from all the others. The current view is that what serves
as food to a living thing is what is contrary to it-not that in every
pair of contraries each is food to the other: to be food a contrary
must not only be transformable into the other and vice versa, it must
also in so doing increase the bulk of the other. Many a contrary is
transformed into its other and vice versa, where neither is even a
quantum and so cannot increase in bulk, e.g. an invalid into a healthy
subject. It is clear that not even those contraries which satisfy
both the conditions mentioned above are food to one another in precisely
the same sense; water may be said to feed fire, but not fire water.
Where the members of the pair are elementary bodies only one of the
contraries, it would appear, can be said to feed the other. But there
is a difficulty here. One set of thinkers assert that like fed, as
well as increased in amount, by like. Another set, as we have said,
maintain the very reverse, viz. that what feeds and what is fed are
contrary to one another; like, they argue, is incapable of being affected
by like; but food is changed in the process of digestion, and change
is always to what is opposite or to what is intermediate. Further,
food is acted upon by what is nourished by it, not the other way round,
as timber is worked by a carpenter and not conversely; there is a
change in the carpenter but it is merely a change from not-working
to working. In answering this problem it makes all the difference
whether we mean by 'the food' the 'finished' or the 'raw' product.
If we use the word food of both, viz. of the completely undigested
and the completely digested matter, we can justify both the rival
accounts of it; taking food in the sense of undigested matter, it
is the contrary of what is fed by it, taking it as digested it is
like what is fed by it. Consequently it is clear that in a certain
sense we may say that both parties are right, both wrong.

Since nothing except what is alive can be fed, what is fed is the
besouled body and just because it has soul in it. Hence food is essentially
related to what has soul in it. Food has a power which is other than
the power to increase the bulk of what is fed by it; so far forth
as what has soul in it is a quantum, food may increase its quantity,
but it is only so far as what has soul in it is a 'this-somewhat'
or substance that food acts as food; in that case it maintains the
being of what is fed, and that continues to be what it is so long
as the process of nutrition continues. Further, it is the agent in
generation, i.e. not the generation of the individual fed but the
reproduction of another like it; the substance of the individual fed
is already in existence; the existence of no substance is a self-generation
but only a self-maintenance. 

Hence the psychic power which we are now studying may be described
as that which tends to maintain whatever has this power in it of continuing
such as it was, and food helps it to do its work. That is why, if
deprived of food, it must cease to be. 

The process of nutrition involves three factors, (a) what is fed,
(b) that wherewith it is fed, (c) what does the feeding; of these
(c) is the first soul, (a) the body which has that soul in it, (b)
the food. But since it is right to call things after the ends they
realize, and the end of this soul is to generate another being like
that in which it is, the first soul ought to be named the reproductive
soul. The expression (b) 'wherewith it is fed' is ambiguous just as
is the expression 'wherewith the ship is steered'; that may mean either
(i) the hand or (ii) the rudder, i.e. either (i) what is moved and
sets in movement, or (ii) what is merely moved. We can apply this
analogy here if we recall that all food must be capable of being digested,
and that what produces digestion is warmth; that is why everything
that has soul in it possesses warmth. 

We have now given an outline account of the nature of food; further
details must be given in the appropriate place. 

Part 5

Having made these distinctions let us now speak of sensation in the
widest sense. Sensation depends, as we have said, on a process of
movement or affection from without, for it is held to be some sort
of change of quality. Now some thinkers assert that like is affected
only by like; in what sense this is possible and in what sense impossible,
we have explained in our general discussion of acting and being acted
upon. 

Here arises a problem: why do we not perceive the senses themselves
as well as the external objects of sense, or why without the stimulation
of external objects do they not produce sensation, seeing that they
contain in themselves fire, earth, and all the other elements, which
are the direct or indirect objects is so of sense? It is clear that
what is sensitive is only potentially, not actually. The power of
sense is parallel to what is combustible, for that never ignites itself
spontaneously, but requires an agent which has the power of starting
ignition; otherwise it could have set itself on fire, and would not
have needed actual fire to set it ablaze. 

In reply we must recall that we use the word 'perceive' in two ways,
for we say (a) that what has the power to hear or see, 'sees' or 'hears',
even though it is at the moment asleep, and also (b) that what is
actually seeing or hearing, 'sees' or 'hears'. Hence 'sense' too must
have two meanings, sense potential, and sense actual. Similarly 'to
be a sentient' means either (a) to have a certain power or (b) to
manifest a certain activity. To begin with, for a time, let us speak
as if there were no difference between (i) being moved or affected,
and (ii) being active, for movement is a kind of activity-an imperfect
kind, as has elsewhere been explained. Everything that is acted upon
or moved is acted upon by an agent which is actually at work. Hence
it is that in one sense, as has already been stated, what acts and
what is acted upon are like, in another unlike, i.e. prior to and
during the change the two factors are unlike, after it like.

But we must now distinguish not only between what is potential and
what is actual but also different senses in which things can be said
to be potential or actual; up to now we have been speaking as if each
of these phrases had only one sense. We can speak of something as
'a knower' either (a) as when we say that man is a knower, meaning
that man falls within the class of beings that know or have knowledge,
or (b) as when we are speaking of a man who possesses a knowledge
of grammar; each of these is so called as having in him a certain
potentiality, but there is a difference between their respective potentialities,
the one (a) being a potential knower, because his kind or matter is
such and such, the other (b), because he can in the absence of any
external counteracting cause realize his knowledge in actual knowing
at will. This implies a third meaning of 'a knower' (c), one who is
already realizing his knowledge-he is a knower in actuality and in
the most proper sense is knowing, e.g. this A. Both the former are
potential knowers, who realize their respective potentialities, the
one (a) by change of quality, i.e. repeated transitions from one state
to its opposite under instruction, the other (b) by the transition
from the inactive possession of sense or grammar to their active exercise.
The two kinds of transition are distinct. 

Also the expression 'to be acted upon' has more than one meaning;
it may mean either (a) the extinction of one of two contraries by
the other, or (b) the maintenance of what is potential by the agency
of what is actual and already like what is acted upon, with such likeness
as is compatible with one's being actual and the other potential.
For what possesses knowledge becomes an actual knower by a transition
which is either not an alteration of it at all (being in reality a
development into its true self or actuality) or at least an alteration
in a quite different sense from the usual meaning. 

Hence it is wrong to speak of a wise man as being 'altered' when he
uses his wisdom, just as it would be absurd to speak of a builder
as being altered when he is using his skill in building a house.

What in the case of knowing or understanding leads from potentiality
to actuality ought not to be called teaching but something else. That
which starting with the power to know learns or acquires knowledge
through the agency of one who actually knows and has the power of
teaching either (a) ought not to be said 'to be acted upon' at all
or (b) we must recognize two senses of alteration, viz. (i) the substitution
of one quality for another, the first being the contrary of the second,
or (ii) the development of an existent quality from potentiality in
the direction of fixity or nature. 

In the case of what is to possess sense, the first transition is due
to the action of the male parent and takes place before birth so that
at birth the living thing is, in respect of sensation, at the stage
which corresponds to the possession of knowledge. Actual sensation
corresponds to the stage of the exercise of knowledge. But between
the two cases compared there is a difference; the objects that excite
the sensory powers to activity, the seen, the heard, &c., are outside.
The ground of this difference is that what actual sensation apprehends
is individuals, while what knowledge apprehends is universals, and
these are in a sense within the soul. That is why a man can exercise
his knowledge when he wishes, but his sensation does not depend upon
himself a sensible object must be there. A similar statement must
be made about our knowledge of what is sensible-on the same ground,
viz. that the sensible objects are individual and external.

A later more appropriate occasion may be found thoroughly to clear
up all this. At present it must be enough to recognize the distinctions
already drawn; a thing may be said to be potential in either of two
senses, (a) in the sense in which we might say of a boy that he may
become a general or (b) in the sense in which we might say the same
of an adult, and there are two corresponding senses of the term 'a
potential sentient'. There are no separate names for the two stages
of potentiality; we have pointed out that they are different and how
they are different. We cannot help using the incorrect terms 'being
acted upon or altered' of the two transitions involved. As we have
said, has the power of sensation is potentially like what the perceived
object is actually; that is, while at the beginning of the process
of its being acted upon the two interacting factors are dissimilar,
at the end the one acted upon is assimilated to the other and is identical
in quality with it. 

Part 6

In dealing with each of the senses we shall have first to speak of
the objects which are perceptible by each. The term 'object of sense'
covers three kinds of objects, two kinds of which are, in our language,
directly perceptible, while the remaining one is only incidentally
perceptible. Of the first two kinds one (a) consists of what is perceptible
by a single sense, the other (b) of what is perceptible by any and
all of the senses. I call by the name of special object of this or
that sense that which cannot be perceived by any other sense than
that one and in respect of which no error is possible; in this sense
colour is the special object of sight, sound of hearing, flavour of
taste. Touch, indeed, discriminates more than one set of different
qualities. Each sense has one kind of object which it discerns, and
never errs in reporting that what is before it is colour or sound
(though it may err as to what it is that is coloured or where that
is, or what it is that is sounding or where that is.) Such objects
are what we propose to call the special objects of this or that sense.

'Common sensibles' are movement, rest, number, figure, magnitude;
these are not peculiar to any one sense, but are common to all. There
are at any rate certain kinds of movement which are perceptible both
by touch and by sight. 

We speak of an incidental object of sense where e.g. the white object
which we see is the son of Diares; here because 'being the son of
Diares' is incidental to the directly visible white patch we speak
of the son of Diares as being (incidentally) perceived or seen by
us. Because this is only incidentally an object of sense, it in no
way as such affects the senses. Of the two former kinds, both of which
are in their own nature perceptible by sense, the first kind-that
of special objects of the several senses-constitute the objects of
sense in the strictest sense of the term and it is to them that in
the nature of things the structure of each several sense is adapted.

Part 7

The object of sight is the visible, and what is visible is (a) colour
and (b) a certain kind of object which can be described in words but
which has no single name; what we mean by (b) will be abundantly clear
as we proceed. Whatever is visible is colour and colour is what lies
upon what is in its own nature visible; 'in its own nature' here means
not that visibility is involved in the definition of what thus underlies
colour, but that that substratum contains in itself the cause of visibility.
Every colour has in it the power to set in movement what is actually
transparent; that power constitutes its very nature. That is why it
is not visible except with the help of light; it is only in light
that the colour of a thing is seen. Hence our first task is to explain
what light is. 

Now there clearly is something which is transparent, and by 'transparent'
I mean what is visible, and yet not visible in itself, but rather
owing its visibility to the colour of something else; of this character
are air, water, and many solid bodies. Neither air nor water is transparent
because it is air or water; they are transparent because each of them
has contained in it a certain substance which is the same in both
and is also found in the eternal body which constitutes the uppermost
shell of the physical Cosmos. Of this substance light is the activity-the
activity of what is transparent so far forth as it has in it the determinate
power of becoming transparent; where this power is present, there
is also the potentiality of the contrary, viz. darkness. Light is
as it were the proper colour of what is transparent, and exists whenever
the potentially transparent is excited to actuality by the influence
of fire or something resembling 'the uppermost body'; for fire too
contains something which is one and the same with the substance in
question. 

We have now explained what the transparent is and what light is; light
is neither fire nor any kind whatsoever of body nor an efflux from
any kind of body (if it were, it would again itself be a kind of body)-it
is the presence of fire or something resembling fire in what is transparent.
It is certainly not a body, for two bodies cannot be present in the
same place. The opposite of light is darkness; darkness is the absence
from what is transparent of the corresponding positive state above
characterized; clearly therefore, light is just the presence of that.

Empedocles (and with him all others who used the same forms of expression)
was wrong in speaking of light as 'travelling' or being at a given
moment between the earth and its envelope, its movement being unobservable
by us; that view is contrary both to the clear evidence of argument
and to the observed facts; if the distance traversed were short, the
movement might have been unobservable, but where the distance is from
extreme East to extreme West, the draught upon our powers of belief
is too great. 

What is capable of taking on colour is what in itself is colourless,
as what can take on sound is what is soundless; what is colourless
includes (a) what is transparent and (b) what is invisible or scarcely
visible, i.e. what is 'dark'. The latter (b) is the same as what is
transparent, when it is potentially, not of course when it is actually
transparent; it is the same substance which is now darkness, now light.

Not everything that is visible depends upon light for its visibility.
This is only true of the 'proper' colour of things. Some objects of
sight which in light are invisible, in darkness stimulate the sense;
that is, things that appear fiery or shining. This class of objects
has no simple common name, but instances of it are fungi, flesh, heads,
scales, and eyes of fish. In none of these is what is seen their own
proper' colour. Why we see these at all is another question. At present
what is obvious is that what is seen in light is always colour. That
is why without the help of light colour remains invisible. Its being
colour at all means precisely its having in it the power to set in
movement what is already actually transparent, and, as we have seen,
the actuality of what is transparent is just light. 

The following experiment makes the necessity of a medium clear. If
what has colour is placed in immediate contact with the eye, it cannot
be seen. Colour sets in movement not the sense organ but what is transparent,
e.g. the air, and that, extending continuously from the object to
the organ, sets the latter in movement. Democritus misrepresents the
facts when he expresses the opinion that if the interspace were empty
one could distinctly see an ant on the vault of the sky; that is an
impossibility. Seeing is due to an affection or change of what has
the perceptive faculty, and it cannot be affected by the seen colour
itself; it remains that it must be affected by what comes between.
Hence it is indispensable that there be something in between-if there
were nothing, so far from seeing with greater distinctness, we should
see nothing at all. 

We have now explained the cause why colour cannot be seen otherwise
than in light. Fire on the other hand is seen both in darkness and
in light; this double possibility follows necessarily from our theory,
for it is just fire that makes what is potentially transparent actually
transparent. 

The same account holds also of sound and smell; if the object of either
of these senses is in immediate contact with the organ no sensation
is produced. In both cases the object sets in movement only what lies
between, and this in turn sets the organ in movement: if what sounds
or smells is brought into immediate contact with the organ, no sensation
will be produced. The same, in spite of all appearances, applies also
to touch and taste; why there is this apparent difference will be
clear later. What comes between in the case of sounds is air; the
corresponding medium in the case of smell has no name. But, corresponding
to what is transparent in the case of colour, there is a quality found
both in air and water, which serves as a medium for what has smell-I
say 'in water' because animals that live in water as well as those
that live on land seem to possess the sense of smell, and 'in air'
because man and all other land animals that breathe, perceive smells
only when they breathe air in. The explanation of this too will be
given later. 

Part 8

Now let us, to begin with, make certain distinctions about sound and
hearing. 

Sound may mean either of two things (a) actual, and (b) potential,
sound. There are certain things which, as we say, 'have no sound',
e.g. sponges or wool, others which have, e.g. bronze and in general
all things which are smooth and solid-the latter are said to have
a sound because they can make a sound, i.e. can generate actual sound
between themselves and the organ of hearing. 

Actual sound requires for its occurrence (i, ii) two such bodies and
(iii) a space between them; for it is generated by an impact. Hence
it is impossible for one body only to generate a sound-there must
be a body impinging and a body impinged upon; what sounds does so
by striking against something else, and this is impossible without
a movement from place to place. 

As we have said, not all bodies can by impact on one another produce
sound; impact on wool makes no sound, while the impact on bronze or
any body which is smooth and hollow does. Bronze gives out a sound
when struck because it is smooth; bodies which are hollow owing to
reflection repeat the original impact over and over again, the body
originally set in movement being unable to escape from the concavity.

Further, we must remark that sound is heard both in air and in water,
though less distinctly in the latter. Yet neither air nor water is
the principal cause of sound. What is required for the production
of sound is an impact of two solids against one another and against
the air. The latter condition is satisfied when the air impinged upon
does not retreat before the blow, i.e. is not dissipated by it.

That is why it must be struck with a sudden sharp blow, if it is to
sound-the movement of the whip must outrun the dispersion of the air,
just as one might get in a stroke at a heap or whirl of sand as it
was traveling rapidly past. 

An echo occurs, when, a mass of air having been unified, bounded,
and prevented from dissipation by the containing walls of a vessel,
the air originally struck by the impinging body and set in movement
by it rebounds from this mass of air like a ball from a wall. It is
probable that in all generation of sound echo takes place, though
it is frequently only indistinctly heard. What happens here must be
analogous to what happens in the case of light; light is always reflected-otherwise
it would not be diffused and outside what was directly illuminated
by the sun there would be blank darkness; but this reflected light
is not always strong enough, as it is when it is reflected from water,
bronze, and other smooth bodies, to cast a shadow, which is the distinguishing
mark by which we recognize light. 

It is rightly said that an empty space plays the chief part in the
production of hearing, for what people mean by 'the vacuum' is the
air, which is what causes hearing, when that air is set in movement
as one continuous mass; but owing to its friability it emits no sound,
being dissipated by impinging upon any surface which is not smooth.
When the surface on which it impinges is quite smooth, what is produced
by the original impact is a united mass, a result due to the smoothness
of the surface with which the air is in contact at the other end.

What has the power of producing sound is what has the power of setting
in movement a single mass of air which is continuous from the impinging
body up to the organ of hearing. The organ of hearing is physically
united with air, and because it is in air, the air inside is moved
concurrently with the air outside. Hence animals do not hear with
all parts of their bodies, nor do all parts admit of the entrance
of air; for even the part which can be moved and can sound has not
air everywhere in it. Air in itself is, owing to its friability, quite
soundless; only when its dissipation is prevented is its movement
sound. The air in the ear is built into a chamber just to prevent
this dissipating movement, in order that the animal may accurately
apprehend all varieties of the movements of the air outside. That
is why we hear also in water, viz. because the water cannot get into
the air chamber or even, owing to the spirals, into the outer ear.
If this does happen, hearing ceases, as it also does if the tympanic
membrane is damaged, just as sight ceases if the membrane covering
the pupil is damaged. It is also a test of deafness whether the ear
does or does not reverberate like a horn; the air inside the ear has
always a movement of its own, but the sound we hear is always the
sounding of something else, not of the organ itself. That is why we
say that we hear with what is empty and echoes, viz. because what
we hear with is a chamber which contains a bounded mass of air.

Which is it that 'sounds', the striking body or the struck? Is not
the answer 'it is both, but each in a different way'? Sound is a movement
of what can rebound from a smooth surface when struck against it.
As we have explained' not everything sounds when it strikes or is
struck, e.g. if one needle is struck against another, neither emits
any sound. In order, therefore, that sound may be generated, what
is struck must be smooth, to enable the air to rebound and be shaken
off from it in one piece. 

The distinctions between different sounding bodies show themselves
only in actual sound; as without the help of light colours remain
invisible, so without the help of actual sound the distinctions between
acute and grave sounds remain inaudible. Acute and grave are here
metaphors, transferred from their proper sphere, viz. that of touch,
where they mean respectively (a) what moves the sense much in a short
time, (b) what moves the sense little in a long time. Not that what
is sharp really moves fast, and what is grave, slowly, but that the
difference in the qualities of the one and the other movement is due
to their respective speeds. There seems to be a sort of parallelism
between what is acute or grave to hearing and what is sharp or blunt
to touch; what is sharp as it were stabs, while what is blunt pushes,
the one producing its effect in a short, the other in a long time,
so that the one is quick, the other slow. 

Let the foregoing suffice as an analysis of sound. Voice is a kind
of sound characteristic of what has soul in it; nothing that is without
soul utters voice, it being only by a metaphor that we speak of the
voice of the flute or the lyre or generally of what (being without
soul) possesses the power of producing a succession of notes which
differ in length and pitch and timbre. The metaphor is based on the
fact that all these differences are found also in voice. Many animals
are voiceless, e.g. all non-sanuineous animals and among sanguineous
animals fish. This is just what we should expect, since voice is a
certain movement of air. The fish, like those in the Achelous, which
are said to have voice, really make the sounds with their gills or
some similar organ. Voice is the sound made by an animal, and that
with a special organ. As we saw, everything that makes a sound does
so by the impact of something (a) against something else, (b) across
a space, (c) filled with air; hence it is only to be expected that
no animals utter voice except those which take in air. Once air is
inbreathed, Nature uses it for two different purposes, as the tongue
is used both for tasting and for articulating; in that case of the
two functions tasting is necessary for the animal's existence (hence
it is found more widely distributed), while articulate speech is a
luxury subserving its possessor's well-being; similarly in the former
case Nature employs the breath both as an indispensable means to the
regulation of the inner temperature of the living body and also as
the matter of articulate voice, in the interests of its possessor's
well-being. Why its former use is indispensable must be discussed
elsewhere. 

The organ of respiration is the windpipe, and the organ to which this
is related as means to end is the lungs. The latter is the part of
the body by which the temperature of land animals is raised above
that of all others. But what primarily requires the air drawn in by
respiration is not only this but the region surrounding the heart.
That is why when animals breathe the air must penetrate inwards.

Voice then is the impact of the inbreathed air against the 'windpipe',
and the agent that produces the impact is the soul resident in these
parts of the body. Not every sound, as we said, made by an animal
is voice (even with the tongue we may merely make a sound which is
not voice, or without the tongue as in coughing); what produces the
impact must have soul in it and must be accompanied by an act of imagination,
for voice is a sound with a meaning, and is not merely the result
of any impact of the breath as in coughing; in voice the breath in
the windpipe is used as an instrument to knock with against the walls
of the windpipe. This is confirmed by our inability to speak when
we are breathing either out or in-we can only do so by holding our
breath; we make the movements with the breath so checked. It is clear
also why fish are voiceless; they have no windpipe. And they have
no windpipe because they do not breathe or take in air. Why they do
not is a question belonging to another inquiry. 

Part 9

Smell and its object are much less easy to determine than what we
have hitherto discussed; the distinguishing characteristic of the
object of smell is less obvious than those of sound or colour. The
ground of this is that our power of smell is less discriminating and
in general inferior to that of many species of animals; men have a
poor sense of smell and our apprehension of its proper objects is
inseparably bound up with and so confused by pleasure and pain, which
shows that in us the organ is inaccurate. It is probable that there
is a parallel failure in the perception of colour by animals that
have hard eyes: probably they discriminate differences of colour only
by the presence or absence of what excites fear, and that it is thus
that human beings distinguish smells. It seems that there is an analogy
between smell and taste, and that the species of tastes run parallel
to those of smells-the only difference being that our sense of taste
is more discriminating than our sense of smell, because the former
is a modification of touch, which reaches in man the maximum of discriminative
accuracy. While in respect of all the other senses we fall below many
species of animals, in respect of touch we far excel all other species
in exactness of discrimination. That is why man is the most intelligent
of all animals. This is confirmed by the fact that it is to differences
in the organ of touch and to nothing else that the differences between
man and man in respect of natural endowment are due; men whose flesh
is hard are ill-endowed by nature, men whose flesh is soft, wellendowed.

As flavours may be divided into (a) sweet, (b) bitter, so with smells.
In some things the flavour and the smell have the same quality, i.e.
both are sweet or both bitter, in others they diverge. Similarly a
smell, like a flavour, may be pungent, astringent, acid, or succulent.
But, as we said, because smells are much less easy to discriminate
than flavours, the names of these varieties are applied to smells
only metaphorically; for example 'sweet' is extended from the taste
to the smell of saffron or honey, 'pungent' to that of thyme, and
so on. 

In the same sense in which hearing has for its object both the audible
and the inaudible, sight both the visible and the invisible, smell
has for its object both the odorous and the inodorous. 'Inodorous'
may be either (a) what has no smell at all, or (b) what has a small
or feeble smell. The same ambiguity lurks in the word 'tasteless'.

Smelling, like the operation of the senses previously examined, takes
place through a medium, i.e. through air or water-I add water, because
water-animals too (both sanguineous and non-sanguineous) seem to smell
just as much as land-animals; at any rate some of them make directly
for their food from a distance if it has any scent. That is why the
following facts constitute a problem for us. All animals smell in
the same way, but man smells only when he inhales; if he exhales or
holds his breath, he ceases to smell, no difference being made whether
the odorous object is distant or near, or even placed inside the nose
and actually on the wall of the nostril; it is a disability common
to all the senses not to perceive what is in immediate contact with
the organ of sense, but our failure to apprehend what is odorous without
the help of inhalation is peculiar (the fact is obvious on making
the experiment). Now since bloodless animals do not breathe, they
must, it might be argued, have some novel sense not reckoned among
the usual five. Our reply must be that this is impossible, since it
is scent that is perceived; a sense that apprehends what is odorous
and what has a good or bad odour cannot be anything but smell. Further,
they are observed to be deleteriously effected by the same strong
odours as man is, e.g. bitumen, sulphur, and the like. These animals
must be able to smell without being able to breathe. The probable
explanation is that in man the organ of smell has a certain superiority
over that in all other animals just as his eyes have over those of
hard-eyed animals. Man's eyes have in the eyelids a kind of shelter
or envelope, which must be shifted or drawn back in order that we
may see, while hardeyed animals have nothing of the kind, but at once
see whatever presents itself in the transparent medium. Similarly
in certain species of animals the organ of smell is like the eye of
hard-eyed animals, uncurtained, while in others which take in air
it probably has a curtain over it, which is drawn back in inhalation,
owing to the dilating of the veins or pores. That explains also why
such animals cannot smell under water; to smell they must first inhale,
and that they cannot do under water. 

Smells come from what is dry as flavours from what is moist. Consequently
the organ of smell is potentially dry. 

Part 10

What can be tasted is always something that can be touched, and just
for that reason it cannot be perceived through an interposed foreign
body, for touch means the absence of any intervening body. Further,
the flavoured and tasteable body is suspended in a liquid matter,
and this is tangible. Hence, if we lived in water, we should perceive
a sweet object introduced into the water, but the water would not
be the medium through which we perceived; our perception would be
due to the solution of the sweet substance in what we imbibed, just
as if it were mixed with some drink. There is no parallel here to
the perception of colour, which is due neither to any blending of
anything with anything, nor to any efflux of anything from anything.
In the case of taste, there is nothing corresponding to the medium
in the case of the senses previously discussed; but as the object
of sight is colour, so the object of taste is flavour. But nothing
excites a perception of flavour without the help of liquid; what acts
upon the sense of taste must be either actually or potentially liquid
like what is saline; it must be both (a) itself easily dissolved,
and (b) capable of dissolving along with itself the tongue. Taste
apprehends both (a) what has taste and (b) what has no taste, if we
mean by (b) what has only a slight or feeble flavour or what tends
to destroy the sense of taste. In this it is exactly parallel to sight,
which apprehends both what is visible and what is invisible (for darkness
is invisible and yet is discriminated by sight; so is, in a different
way, what is over brilliant), and to hearing, which apprehends both
sound and silence, of which the one is audible and the other inaudible,
and also over-loud sound. This corresponds in the case of hearing
to over-bright light in the case of sight. As a faint sound is 'inaudible',
so in a sense is a loud or violent sound. The word 'invisible' and
similar privative terms cover not only (a) what is simply without
some power, but also (b) what is adapted by nature to have it but
has not it or has it only in a very low degree, as when we say that
a species of swallow is 'footless' or that a variety of fruit is 'stoneless'.
So too taste has as its object both what can be tasted and the tasteless-the
latter in the sense of what has little flavour or a bad flavour or
one destructive of taste. The difference between what is tasteless
and what is not seems to rest ultimately on that between what is drinkable
and what is undrinkable both are tasteable, but the latter is bad
and tends to destroy taste, while the former is the normal stimulus
of taste. What is drinkable is the common object of both touch and
taste. 

Since what can be tasted is liquid, the organ for its perception cannot
be either (a) actually liquid or (b) incapable of becoming liquid.
Tasting means a being affected by what can be tasted as such; hence
the organ of taste must be liquefied, and so to start with must be
non-liquid but capable of liquefaction without loss of its distinctive
nature. This is confirmed by the fact that the tongue cannot taste
either when it is too dry or when it is too moist; in the latter case
what occurs is due to a contact with the pre-existent moisture in
the tongue itself, when after a foretaste of some strong flavour we
try to taste another flavour; it is in this way that sick persons
find everything they taste bitter, viz. because, when they taste,
their tongues are overflowing with bitter moisture. 

The species of flavour are, as in the case of colour, (a) simple,
i.e. the two contraries, the sweet and the bitter, (b) secondary,
viz. (i) on the side of the sweet, the succulent, (ii) on the side
of the bitter, the saline, (iii) between these come the pungent, the
harsh, the astringent, and the acid; these pretty well exhaust the
varieties of flavour. It follows that what has the power of tasting
is what is potentially of that kind, and that what is tasteable is
what has the power of making it actually what it itself already is.

Part 11

Whatever can be said of what is tangible, can be said of touch, and
vice versa; if touch is not a single sense but a group of senses,
there must be several kinds of what is tangible. It is a problem whether
touch is a single sense or a group of senses. It is also a problem,
what is the organ of touch; is it or is it not the flesh (including
what in certain animals is homologous with flesh)? On the second view,
flesh is 'the medium' of touch, the real organ being situated farther
inward. The problem arises because the field of each sense is according
to the accepted view determined as the range between a single pair
of contraries, white and black for sight, acute and grave for hearing,
bitter and sweet for taste; but in the field of what is tangible we
find several such pairs, hot cold, dry moist, hard soft, &c. This
problem finds a partial solution, when it is recalled that in the
case of the other senses more than one pair of contraries are to be
met with, e.g. in sound not only acute and grave but loud and soft,
smooth and rough, &c.; there are similar contrasts in the field of
colour. Nevertheless we are unable clearly to detect in the case of
touch what the single subject is which underlies the contrasted qualities
and corresponds to sound in the case of hearing. 

To the question whether the organ of touch lies inward or not (i.e.
whether we need look any farther than the flesh), no indication in
favour of the second answer can be drawn from the fact that if the
object comes into contact with the flesh it is at once perceived.
For even under present conditions if the experiment is made of making
a web and stretching it tight over the flesh, as soon as this web
is touched the sensation is reported in the same manner as before,
yet it is clear that the or is gan is not in this membrane. If the
membrane could be grown on to the flesh, the report would travel still
quicker. The flesh plays in touch very much the same part as would
be played in the other senses by an air-envelope growing round our
body; had we such an envelope attached to us we should have supposed
that it was by a single organ that we perceived sounds, colours, and
smells, and we should have taken sight, hearing, and smell to be a
single sense. But as it is, because that through which the different
movements are transmitted is not naturally attached to our bodies,
the difference of the various sense-organs is too plain to miss. But
in the case of touch the obscurity remains. 

There must be such a naturally attached 'medium' as flesh, for no
living body could be constructed of air or water; it must be something
solid. Consequently it must be composed of earth along with these,
which is just what flesh and its analogue in animals which have no
true flesh tend to be. Hence of necessity the medium through which
are transmitted the manifoldly contrasted tactual qualities must be
a body naturally attached to the organism. That they are manifold
is clear when we consider touching with the tongue; we apprehend at
the tongue all tangible qualities as well as flavour. Suppose all
the rest of our flesh was, like the tongue, sensitive to flavour,
we should have identified the sense of taste and the sense of touch;
what saves us from this identification is the fact that touch and
taste are not always found together in the same part of the body.
The following problem might be raised. Let us assume that every body
has depth, i.e. has three dimensions, and that if two bodies have
a third body between them they cannot be in contact with one another;
let us remember that what is liquid is a body and must be or contain
water, and that if two bodies touch one another under water, their
touching surfaces cannot be dry, but must have water between, viz.
the water which wets their bounding surfaces; from all this it follows
that in water two bodies cannot be in contact with one another. The
same holds of two bodies in air-air being to bodies in air precisely
what water is to bodies in water-but the facts are not so evident
to our observation, because we live in air, just as animals that live
in water would not notice that the things which touch one another
in water have wet surfaces. The problem, then, is: does the perception
of all objects of sense take place in the same way, or does it not,
e.g. taste and touch requiring contact (as they are commonly thought
to do), while all other senses perceive over a distance? The distinction
is unsound; we perceive what is hard or soft, as well as the objects
of hearing, sight, and smell, through a 'medium', only that the latter
are perceived over a greater distance than the former; that is why
the facts escape our notice. For we do perceive everything through
a medium; but in these cases the fact escapes us. Yet, to repeat what
we said before, if the medium for touch were a membrane separating
us from the object without our observing its existence, we should
be relatively to it in the same condition as we are now to air or
water in which we are immersed; in their case we fancy we can touch
objects, nothing coming in between us and them. But there remains
this difference between what can be touched and what can be seen or
can sound; in the latter two cases we perceive because the medium
produces a certain effect upon us, whereas in the perception of objects
of touch we are affected not by but along with the medium; it is as
if a man were struck through his shield, where the shock is not first
given to the shield and passed on to the man, but the concussion of
both is simultaneous. 

In general, flesh and the tongue are related to the real organs of
touch and taste, as air and water are to those of sight, hearing,
and smell. Hence in neither the one case nor the other can there be
any perception of an object if it is placed immediately upon the organ,
e.g. if a white object is placed on the surface of the eye. This again
shows that what has the power of perceiving the tangible is seated
inside. Only so would there be a complete analogy with all the other
senses. In their case if you place the object on the organ it is not
perceived, here if you place it on the flesh it is perceived; therefore
flesh is not the organ but the medium of touch. 

What can be touched are distinctive qualities of body as body; by
such differences I mean those which characterize the elements, viz,
hot cold, dry moist, of which we have spoken earlier in our treatise
on the elements. The organ for the perception of these is that of
touch-that part of the body in which primarily the sense of touch
resides. This is that part which is potentially such as its object
is actually: for all sense-perception is a process of being so affected;
so that that which makes something such as it itself actually is makes
the other such because the other is already potentially such. That
is why when an object of touch is equally hot and cold or hard and
soft we cannot perceive; what we perceive must have a degree of the
sensible quality lying beyond the neutral point. This implies that
the sense itself is a 'mean' between any two opposite qualities which
determine the field of that sense. It is to this that it owes its
power of discerning the objects in that field. What is 'in the middle'
is fitted to discern; relatively to either extreme it can put itself
in the place of the other. As what is to perceive both white and black
must, to begin with, be actually neither but potentially either (and
so with all the other sense-organs), so the organ of touch must be
neither hot nor cold. 

Further, as in a sense sight had for its object both what was visible
and what was invisible (and there was a parallel truth about all the
other senses discussed), so touch has for its object both what is
tangible and what is intangible. Here by 'intangible' is meant (a)
what like air possesses some quality of tangible things in a very
slight degree and (b) what possesses it in an excessive degree, as
destructive things do. 

We have now given an outline account of each of the several senses.

Part 12

The following results applying to any and every sense may now be formulated.

(A) By a 'sense' is meant what has the power of receiving into itself
the sensible forms of things without the matter. This must be conceived
of as taking place in the way in which a piece of wax takes on the
impress of a signet-ring without the iron or gold; we say that what
produces the impression is a signet of bronze or gold, but its particular
metallic constitution makes no difference: in a similar way the sense
is affected by what is coloured or flavoured or sounding, but it is
indifferent what in each case the substance is; what alone matters
is what quality it has, i.e. in what ratio its constituents are combined.

(B) By 'an organ of sense' is meant that in which ultimately such
a power is seated. 

The sense and its organ are the same in fact, but their essence is
not the same. What perceives is, of course, a spatial magnitude, but
we must not admit that either the having the power to perceive or
the sense itself is a magnitude; what they are is a certain ratio
or power in a magnitude. This enables us to explain why objects of
sense which possess one of two opposite sensible qualities in a degree
largely in excess of the other opposite destroy the organs of sense;
if the movement set up by an object is too strong for the organ, the
equipoise of contrary qualities in the organ, which just is its sensory
power, is disturbed; it is precisely as concord and tone are destroyed
by too violently twanging the strings of a lyre. This explains also
why plants cannot perceive. in spite of their having a portion of
soul in them and obviously being affected by tangible objects themselves;
for undoubtedly their temperature can be lowered or raised. The explanation
is that they have no mean of contrary qualities, and so no principle
in them capable of taking on the forms of sensible objects without
their matter; in the case of plants the affection is an affection
by form-and-matter together. The problem might be raised: Can what
cannot smell be said to be affected by smells or what cannot see by
colours, and so on? It might be said that a smell is just what can
be smelt, and if it produces any effect it can only be so as to make
something smell it, and it might be argued that what cannot smell
cannot be affected by smells and further that what can smell can be
affected by it only in so far as it has in it the power to smell (similarly
with the proper objects of all the other senses). Indeed that this
is so is made quite evident as follows. Light or darkness, sounds
and smells leave bodies quite unaffected; what does affect bodies
is not these but the bodies which are their vehicles, e.g. what splits
the trunk of a tree is not the sound of the thunder but the air which
accompanies thunder. Yes, but, it may be objected, bodies are affected
by what is tangible and by flavours. If not, by what are things that
are without soul affected, i.e. altered in quality? Must we not, then,
admit that the objects of the other senses also may affect them? Is
not the true account this, that all bodies are capable of being affected
by smells and sounds, but that some on being acted upon, having no
boundaries of their own, disintegrate, as in the instance of air,
which does become odorous, showing that some effect is produced on
it by what is odorous? But smelling is more than such an affection
by what is odorous-what more? Is not the answer that, while the air
owing to the momentary duration of the action upon it of what is odorous
does itself become perceptible to the sense of smell, smelling is
an observing of the result produced? 



BOOK III

Part 1 

That there is no sixth sense in addition to the five enumerated-sight,
hearing, smell, taste, touch-may be established by the following considerations:

If we have actually sensation of everything of which touch can give
us sensation (for all the qualities of the tangible qua tangible are
perceived by us through touch); and if absence of a sense necessarily
involves absence of a sense-organ; and if (1) all objects that we
perceive by immediate contact with them are perceptible by touch,
which sense we actually possess, and (2) all objects that we perceive
through media, i.e. without immediate contact, are perceptible by
or through the simple elements, e.g. air and water (and this is so
arranged that (a) if more than one kind of sensible object is perceivable
through a single medium, the possessor of a sense-organ homogeneous
with that medium has the power of perceiving both kinds of objects;
for example, if the sense-organ is made of air, and air is a medium
both for sound and for colour; and that (b) if more than one medium
can transmit the same kind of sensible objects, as e.g. water as well
as air can transmit colour, both being transparent, then the possessor
of either alone will be able to perceive the kind of objects transmissible
through both); and if of the simple elements two only, air and water,
go to form sense-organs (for the pupil is made of water, the organ
of hearing is made of air, and the organ of smell of one or other
of these two, while fire is found either in none or in all-warmth
being an essential condition of all sensibility-and earth either in
none or, if anywhere, specially mingled with the components of the
organ of touch; wherefore it would remain that there can be no sense-organ
formed of anything except water and air); and if these sense-organs
are actually found in certain animals;-then all the possible senses
are possessed by those animals that are not imperfect or mutilated
(for even the mole is observed to have eyes beneath its skin); so
that, if there is no fifth element and no property other than those
which belong to the four elements of our world, no sense can be wanting
to such animals. 

Further, there cannot be a special sense-organ for the common sensibles
either, i.e. the objects which we perceive incidentally through this
or that special sense, e.g. movement, rest, figure, magnitude, number,
unity; for all these we perceive by movement, e.g. magnitude by movement,
and therefore also figure (for figure is a species of magnitude),
what is at rest by the absence of movement: number is perceived by
the negation of continuity, and by the special sensibles; for each
sense perceives one class of sensible objects. So that it is clearly
impossible that there should be a special sense for any one of the
common sensibles, e.g. movement; for, if that were so, our perception
of it would be exactly parallel to our present perception of what
is sweet by vision. That is so because we have a sense for each of
the two qualities, in virtue of which when they happen to meet in
one sensible object we are aware of both contemporaneously. If it
were not like this our perception of the common qualities would always
be incidental, i.e. as is the perception of Cleon's son, where we
perceive him not as Cleon's son but as white, and the white thing
which we really perceive happens to be Cleon's son. 

But in the case of the common sensibles there is already in us a general
sensibility which enables us to perceive them directly; there is therefore
no special sense required for their perception: if there were, our
perception of them would have been exactly like what has been above
described. 

The senses perceive each other's special objects incidentally; not
because the percipient sense is this or that special sense, but because
all form a unity: this incidental perception takes place whenever
sense is directed at one and the same moment to two disparate qualities
in one and the same object, e.g. to the bitterness and the yellowness
of bile, the assertion of the identity of both cannot be the act of
either of the senses; hence the illusion of sense, e.g. the belief
that if a thing is yellow it is bile. 

It might be asked why we have more senses than one. Is it to prevent
a failure to apprehend the common sensibles, e.g. movement, magnitude,
and number, which go along with the special sensibles? Had we no sense
but sight, and that sense no object but white, they would have tended
to escape our notice and everything would have merged for us into
an indistinguishable identity because of the concomitance of colour
and magnitude. As it is, the fact that the common sensibles are given
in the objects of more than one sense reveals their distinction from
each and all of the special sensibles. 

Part 2

Since it is through sense that we are aware that we are seeing or
hearing, it must be either by sight that we are aware of seeing, or
by some sense other than sight. But the sense that gives us this new
sensation must perceive both sight and its object, viz. colour: so
that either (1) there will be two senses both percipient of the same
sensible object, or (2) the sense must be percipient of itself. Further,
even if the sense which perceives sight were different from sight,
we must either fall into an infinite regress, or we must somewhere
assume a sense which is aware of itself. If so, we ought to do this
in the first case. 

This presents a difficulty: if to perceive by sight is just to see,
and what is seen is colour (or the coloured), then if we are to see
that which sees, that which sees originally must be coloured. It is
clear therefore that 'to perceive by sight' has more than one meaning;
for even when we are not seeing, it is by sight that we discriminate
darkness from light, though not in the same way as we distinguish
one colour from another. Further, in a sense even that which sees
is coloured; for in each case the sense-organ is capable of receiving
the sensible object without its matter. That is why even when the
sensible objects are gone the sensings and imaginings continue to
exist in the sense-organs. 

The activity of the sensible object and that of the percipient sense
is one and the same activity, and yet the distinction between their
being remains. Take as illustration actual sound and actual hearing:
a man may have hearing and yet not be hearing, and that which has
a sound is not always sounding. But when that which can hear is actively
hearing and which can sound is sounding, then the actual hearing and
the actual sound are merged in one (these one might call respectively
hearkening and sounding). 

If it is true that the movement, both the acting and the being acted
upon, is to be found in that which is acted upon, both the sound and
the hearing so far as it is actual must be found in that which has
the faculty of hearing; for it is in the passive factor that the actuality
of the active or motive factor is realized; that is why that which
causes movement may be at rest. Now the actuality of that which can
sound is just sound or sounding, and the actuality of that which can
hear is hearing or hearkening; 'sound' and 'hearing' are both ambiguous.
The same account applies to the other senses and their objects. For
as the-acting-and-being-acted-upon is to be found in the passive,
not in the active factor, so also the actuality of the sensible object
and that of the sensitive subject are both realized in the latter.
But while in some cases each aspect of the total actuality has a distinct
name, e.g. sounding and hearkening, in some one or other is nameless,
e.g. the actuality of sight is called seeing, but the actuality of
colour has no name: the actuality of the faculty of taste is called
tasting, but the actuality of flavour has no name. Since the actualities
of the sensible object and of the sensitive faculty are one actuality
in spite of the difference between their modes of being, actual hearing
and actual sounding appear and disappear from existence at one and
the same moment, and so actual savour and actual tasting, &c., while
as potentialities one of them may exist without the other. The earlier
students of nature were mistaken in their view that without sight
there was no white or black, without taste no savour. This statement
of theirs is partly true, partly false: 'sense' and 'the sensible
object' are ambiguous terms, i.e. may denote either potentialities
or actualities: the statement is true of the latter, false of the
former. This ambiguity they wholly failed to notice. 

If voice always implies a concord, and if the voice and the hearing
of it are in one sense one and the same, and if concord always implies
a ratio, hearing as well as what is heard must be a ratio. That is
why the excess of either the sharp or the flat destroys the hearing.
(So also in the case of savours excess destroys the sense of taste,
and in the case of colours excessive brightness or darkness destroys
the sight, and in the case of smell excess of strength whether in
the direction of sweetness or bitterness is destructive.) This shows
that the sense is a ratio. 

That is also why the objects of sense are (1) pleasant when the sensible
extremes such as acid or sweet or salt being pure and unmixed are
brought into the proper ratio; then they are pleasant: and in general
what is blended is more pleasant than the sharp or the flat alone;
or, to touch, that which is capable of being either warmed or chilled:
the sense and the ratio are identical: while (2) in excess the sensible
extremes are painful or destructive. 

Each sense then is relative to its particular group of sensible qualities:
it is found in a sense-organ as such and discriminates the differences
which exist within that group; e.g. sight discriminates white and
black, taste sweet and bitter, and so in all cases. Since we also
discriminate white from sweet, and indeed each sensible quality from
every other, with what do we perceive that they are different? It
must be by sense; for what is before us is sensible objects. (Hence
it is also obvious that the flesh cannot be the ultimate sense-organ:
if it were, the discriminating power could not do its work without
immediate contact with the object.) 

Therefore (1) discrimination between white and sweet cannot be effected
by two agencies which remain separate; both the qualities discriminated
must be present to something that is one and single. On any other
supposition even if I perceived sweet and you perceived white, the
difference between them would be apparent. What says that two things
are different must be one; for sweet is different from white. Therefore
what asserts this difference must be self-identical, and as what asserts,
so also what thinks or perceives. That it is not possible by means
of two agencies which remain separate to discriminate two objects
which are separate, is therefore obvious; and that (it is not possible
to do this in separate movements of time may be seen' if we look at
it as follows. For as what asserts the difference between the good
and the bad is one and the same, so also the time at which it asserts
the one to be different and the other to be different is not accidental
to the assertion (as it is for instance when I now assert a difference
but do not assert that there is now a difference); it asserts thus-both
now and that the objects are different now; the objects therefore
must be present at one and the same moment. Both the discriminating
power and the time of its exercise must be one and undivided.

But, it may be objected, it is impossible that what is self-identical
should be moved at me and the same time with contrary movements in
so far as it is undivided, and in an undivided moment of time. For
if what is sweet be the quality perceived, it moves the sense or thought
in this determinate way, while what is bitter moves it in a contrary
way, and what is white in a different way. Is it the case then that
what discriminates, though both numerically one and indivisible, is
at the same time divided in its being? In one sense, it is what is
divided that perceives two separate objects at once, but in another
sense it does so qua undivided; for it is divisible in its being but
spatially and numerically undivided. is not this impossible? For while
it is true that what is self-identical and undivided may be both contraries
at once potentially, it cannot be self-identical in its being-it must
lose its unity by being put into activity. It is not possible to be
at once white and black, and therefore it must also be impossible
for a thing to be affected at one and the same moment by the forms
of both, assuming it to be the case that sensation and thinking are
properly so described. 

The answer is that just as what is called a 'point' is, as being at
once one and two, properly said to be divisible, so here, that which
discriminates is qua undivided one, and active in a single moment
of time, while so far forth as it is divisible it twice over uses
the same dot at one and the same time. So far forth then as it takes
the limit as two' it discriminates two separate objects with what
in a sense is divided: while so far as it takes it as one, it does
so with what is one and occupies in its activity a single moment of
time. 

About the principle in virtue of which we say that animals are percipient,
let this discussion suffice. 

Part 3

There are two distinctive peculiarities by reference to which we characterize
the soul (1) local movement and (2) thinking, discriminating, and
perceiving. Thinking both speculative and practical is regarded as
akin to a form of perceiving; for in the one as well as the other
the soul discriminates and is cognizant of something which is. Indeed
the ancients go so far as to identify thinking and perceiving; e.g.
Empedocles says 'For 'tis in respect of what is present that man's
wit is increased', and again 'Whence it befalls them from time to
time to think diverse thoughts', and Homer's phrase 'For suchlike
is man's mind' means the same. They all look upon thinking as a bodily
process like perceiving, and hold that like is known as well as perceived
by like, as I explained at the beginning of our discussion. Yet they
ought at the same time to have accounted for error also; for it is
more intimately connected with animal existence and the soul continues
longer in the state of error than in that of truth. They cannot escape
the dilemma: either (1) whatever seems is true (and there are some
who accept this) or (2) error is contact with the unlike; for that
is the opposite of the knowing of like by like. 

But it is a received principle that error as well as knowledge in
respect to contraries is one and the same. 

That perceiving and practical thinking are not identical is therefore
obvious; for the former is universal in the animal world, the latter
is found in only a small division of it. Further, speculative thinking
is also distinct from perceiving-I mean that in which we find rightness
and wrongness-rightness in prudence, knowledge, true opinion, wrongness
in their opposites; for perception of the special objects of sense
is always free from error, and is found in all animals, while it is
possible to think falsely as well as truly, and thought is found only
where there is discourse of reason as well as sensibility. For imagination
is different from either perceiving or discursive thinking, though
it is not found without sensation, or judgement without it. That this
activity is not the same kind of thinking as judgement is obvious.
For imagining lies within our own power whenever we wish (e.g. we
can call up a picture, as in the practice of mnemonics by the use
of mental images), but in forming opinions we are not free: we cannot
escape the alternative of falsehood or truth. Further, when we think
something to be fearful or threatening, emotion is immediately produced,
and so too with what is encouraging; but when we merely imagine we
remain as unaffected as persons who are looking at a painting of some
dreadful or encouraging scene. Again within the field of judgement
itself we find varieties, knowledge, opinion, prudence, and their
opposites; of the differences between these I must speak elsewhere.

Thinking is different from perceiving and is held to be in part imagination,
in part judgement: we must therefore first mark off the sphere of
imagination and then speak of judgement. If then imagination is that
in virtue of which an image arises for us, excluding metaphorical
uses of the term, is it a single faculty or disposition relative to
images, in virtue of which we discriminate and are either in error
or not? The faculties in virtue of which we do this are sense, opinion,
science, intelligence. 

That imagination is not sense is clear from the following considerations:
Sense is either a faculty or an activity, e.g. sight or seeing: imagination
takes place in the absence of both, as e.g. in dreams. (Again, sense
is always present, imagination not. If actual imagination and actual
sensation were the same, imagination would be found in all the brutes:
this is held not to be the case; e.g. it is not found in ants or bees
or grubs. (Again, sensations are always true, imaginations are for
the most part false. (Once more, even in ordinary speech, we do not,
when sense functions precisely with regard to its object, say that
we imagine it to be a man, but rather when there is some failure of
accuracy in its exercise. And as we were saying before, visions appear
to us even when our eyes are shut. Neither is imagination any of the
things that are never in error: e.g. knowledge or intelligence; for
imagination may be false. 

It remains therefore to see if it is opinion, for opinion may be either
true or false. 

But opinion involves belief (for without belief in what we opine we
cannot have an opinion), and in the brutes though we often find imagination
we never find belief. Further, every opinion is accompanied by belief,
belief by conviction, and conviction by discourse of reason: while
there are some of the brutes in which we find imagination, without
discourse of reason. It is clear then that imagination cannot, again,
be (1) opinion plus sensation, or (2) opinion mediated by sensation,
or (3) a blend of opinion and sensation; this is impossible both for
these reasons and because the content of the supposed opinion cannot
be different from that of the sensation (I mean that imagination must
be the blending of the perception of white with the opinion that it
is white: it could scarcely be a blend of the opinion that it is good
with the perception that it is white): to imagine is therefore (on
this view) identical with the thinking of exactly the same as what
one in the strictest sense perceives. But what we imagine is sometimes
false though our contemporaneous judgement about it is true; e.g.
we imagine the sun to be a foot in diameter though we are convinced
that it is larger than the inhabited part of the earth, and the following
dilemma presents itself. Either (a while the fact has not changed
and the (observer has neither forgotten nor lost belief in the true
opinion which he had, that opinion has disappeared, or (b) if he retains
it then his opinion is at once true and false. A true opinion, however,
becomes false only when the fact alters without being noticed.

Imagination is therefore neither any one of the states enumerated,
nor compounded out of them. 

But since when one thing has been set in motion another thing may
be moved by it, and imagination is held to be a movement and to be
impossible without sensation, i.e. to occur in beings that are percipient
and to have for its content what can be perceived, and since movement
may be produced by actual sensation and that movement is necessarily
similar in character to the sensation itself, this movement must be
(1) necessarily (a) incapable of existing apart from sensation, (b)
incapable of existing except when we perceive, (such that in virtue
of its possession that in which it is found may present various phenomena
both active and passive, and (such that it may be either true or false.

The reason of the last characteristic is as follows. Perception (1)
of the special objects of sense is never in error or admits the least
possible amount of falsehood. (2) That of the concomitance of the
objects concomitant with the sensible qualities comes next: in this
case certainly we may be deceived; for while the perception that there
is white before us cannot be false, the perception that what is white
is this or that may be false. (3) Third comes the perception of the
universal attributes which accompany the concomitant objects to which
the special sensibles attach (I mean e.g. of movement and magnitude);
it is in respect of these that the greatest amount of sense-illusion
is possible. 

The motion which is due to the activity of sense in these three modes
of its exercise will differ from the activity of sense; (1) the first
kind of derived motion is free from error while the sensation is present;
(2) and (3) the others may be erroneous whether it is present or absent,
especially when the object of perception is far off. If then imagination
presents no other features than those enumerated and is what we have
described, then imagination must be a movement resulting from an actual
exercise of a power of sense. 

As sight is the most highly developed sense, the name Phantasia (imagination)
has been formed from Phaos (light) because it is not possible to see
without light. 

And because imaginations remain in the organs of sense and resemble
sensations, animals in their actions are largely guided by them, some
(i.e. the brutes) because of the non-existence in them of mind, others
(i.e. men) because of the temporary eclipse in them of mind by feeling
or disease or sleep. 

About imagination, what it is and why it exists, let so much suffice.

Part 4

Turning now to the part of the soul with which the soul knows and
thinks (whether this is separable from the others in definition only,
or spatially as well) we have to inquire (1) what differentiates this
part, and (2) how thinking can take place. 

If thinking is like perceiving, it must be either a process in which
the soul is acted upon by what is capable of being thought, or a process
different from but analogous to that. The thinking part of the soul
must therefore be, while impassible, capable of receiving the form
of an object; that is, must be potentially identical in character
with its object without being the object. Mind must be related to
what is thinkable, as sense is to what is sensible. 

Therefore, since everything is a possible object of thought, mind
in order, as Anaxagoras says, to dominate, that is, to know, must
be pure from all admixture; for the co-presence of what is alien to
its nature is a hindrance and a block: it follows that it too, like
the sensitive part, can have no nature of its own, other than that
of having a certain capacity. Thus that in the soul which is called
mind (by mind I mean that whereby the soul thinks and judges) is,
before it thinks, not actually any real thing. For this reason it
cannot reasonably be regarded as blended with the body: if so, it
would acquire some quality, e.g. warmth or cold, or even have an organ
like the sensitive faculty: as it is, it has none. It was a good idea
to call the soul 'the place of forms', though (1) this description
holds only of the intellective soul, and (2) even this is the forms
only potentially, not actually. 

Observation of the sense-organs and their employment reveals a distinction
between the impassibility of the sensitive and that of the intellective
faculty. After strong stimulation of a sense we are less able to exercise
it than before, as e.g. in the case of a loud sound we cannot hear
easily immediately after, or in the case of a bright colour or a powerful
odour we cannot see or smell, but in the case of mind thought about
an object that is highly intelligible renders it more and not less
able afterwards to think objects that are less intelligible: the reason
is that while the faculty of sensation is dependent upon the body,
mind is separable from it. 

Once the mind has become each set of its possible objects, as a man
of science has, when this phrase is used of one who is actually a
man of science (this happens when he is now able to exercise the power
on his own initiative), its condition is still one of potentiality,
but in a different sense from the potentiality which preceded the
acquisition of knowledge by learning or discovery: the mind too is
then able to think itself. 

Since we can distinguish between a spatial magnitude and what it is
to be such, and between water and what it is to be water, and so in
many other cases (though not in all; for in certain cases the thing
and its form are identical), flesh and what it is to be flesh are
discriminated either by different faculties, or by the same faculty
in two different states: for flesh necessarily involves matter and
is like what is snub-nosed, a this in a this. Now it is by means of
the sensitive faculty that we discriminate the hot and the cold, i.e.
the factors which combined in a certain ratio constitute flesh: the
essential character of flesh is apprehended by something different
either wholly separate from the sensitive faculty or related to it
as a bent line to the same line when it has been straightened out.

Again in the case of abstract objects what is straight is analogous
to what is snub-nosed; for it necessarily implies a continuum as its
matter: its constitutive essence is different, if we may distinguish
between straightness and what is straight: let us take it to be two-ness.
It must be apprehended, therefore, by a different power or by the
same power in a different state. To sum up, in so far as the realities
it knows are capable of being separated from their matter, so it is
also with the powers of mind. 

The problem might be suggested: if thinking is a passive affection,
then if mind is simple and impassible and has nothing in common with
anything else, as Anaxagoras says, how can it come to think at all?
For interaction between two factors is held to require a precedent
community of nature between the factors. Again it might be asked,
is mind a possible object of thought to itself? For if mind is thinkable
per se and what is thinkable is in kind one and the same, then either
(a) mind will belong to everything, or (b) mind will contain some
element common to it with all other realities which makes them all
thinkable. 

(1) Have not we already disposed of the difficulty about interaction
involving a common element, when we said that mind is in a sense potentially
whatever is thinkable, though actually it is nothing until it has
thought? What it thinks must be in it just as characters may be said
to be on a writingtablet on which as yet nothing actually stands written:
this is exactly what happens with mind. 

(Mind is itself thinkable in exactly the same way as its objects are.
For (a) in the case of objects which involve no matter, what thinks
and what is thought are identical; for speculative knowledge and its
object are identical. (Why mind is not always thinking we must consider
later., b) In the case of those which contain matter each of the
objects of thought is only potentially present. It follows that while
they will not have mind in them (for mind is a potentiality of them
only in so far as they are capable of being disengaged from matter)
mind may yet be thinkable. 

Part 5

Since in every class of things, as in nature as a whole, we find two
factors involved, (1) a matter which is potentially all the particulars
included in the class, (2) a cause which is productive in the sense
that it makes them all (the latter standing to the former, as e.g.
an art to its material), these distinct elements must likewise be
found within the soul. 

And in fact mind as we have described it is what it is what it is
by virtue of becoming all things, while there is another which is
what it is by virtue of making all things: this is a sort of positive
state like light; for in a sense light makes potential colours into
actual colours. 

Mind in this sense of it is separable, impassible, unmixed, since
it is in its essential nature activity (for always the active is superior
to the passive factor, the originating force to the matter which it
forms). 

Actual knowledge is identical with its object: in the individual,
potential knowledge is in time prior to actual knowledge, but in the
universe as a whole it is not prior even in time. Mind is not at one
time knowing and at another not. When mind is set free from its present
conditions it appears as just what it is and nothing more: this alone
is immortal and eternal (we do not, however, remember its former activity
because, while mind in this sense is impassible, mind as passive is
destructible), and without it nothing thinks. 

Part 6

The thinking then of the simple objects of thought is found in those
cases where falsehood is impossible: where the alternative of true
or false applies, there we always find a putting together of objects
of thought in a quasi-unity. As Empedocles said that 'where heads
of many a creature sprouted without necks' they afterwards by Love's
power were combined, so here too objects of thought which were given
separate are combined, e.g. 'incommensurate' and 'diagonal': if the
combination be of objects past or future the combination of thought
includes in its content the date. For falsehood always involves a
synthesis; for even if you assert that what is white is not white
you have included not white in a synthesis. It is possible also to
call all these cases division as well as combination. However that
may be, there is not only the true or false assertion that Cleon is
white but also the true or false assertion that he was or will he
white. In each and every case that which unifies is mind.

Since the word 'simple' has two senses, i.e. may mean either (a) 'not
capable of being divided' or (b) 'not actually divided', there is
nothing to prevent mind from knowing what is undivided, e.g. when
it apprehends a length (which is actually undivided) and that in an
undivided time; for the time is divided or undivided in the same manner
as the line. It is not possible, then, to tell what part of the line
it was apprehending in each half of the time: the object has no actual
parts until it has been divided: if in thought you think each half
separately, then by the same act you divide the time also, the half-lines
becoming as it were new wholes of length. But if you think it as a
whole consisting of these two possible parts, then also you think
it in a time which corresponds to both parts together. (But what is
not quantitatively but qualitatively simple is thought in a simple
time and by a simple act of the soul.) 

But that which mind thinks and the time in which it thinks are in
this case divisible only incidentally and not as such. For in them
too there is something indivisible (though, it may be, not isolable)
which gives unity to the time and the whole of length; and this is
found equally in every continuum whether temporal or spatial.

Points and similar instances of things that divide, themselves being
indivisible, are realized in consciousness in the same manner as privations.

A similar account may be given of all other cases, e.g. how evil or
black is cognized; they are cognized, in a sense, by means of their
contraries. That which cognizes must have an element of potentiality
in its being, and one of the contraries must be in it. But if there
is anything that has no contrary, then it knows itself and is actually
and possesses independent existence. 

Assertion is the saying of something concerning something, e.g. affirmation,
and is in every case either true or false: this is not always the
case with mind: the thinking of the definition in the sense of the
constitutive essence is never in error nor is it the assertion of
something concerning something, but, just as while the seeing of the
special object of sight can never be in error, the belief that the
white object seen is a man may be mistaken, so too in the case of
objects which are without matter. 

Part 7

Actual knowledge is identical with its object: potential knowledge
in the individual is in time prior to actual knowledge but in the
universe it has no priority even in time; for all things that come
into being arise from what actually is. In the case of sense clearly
the sensitive faculty already was potentially what the object makes
it to be actually; the faculty is not affected or altered. This must
therefore be a different kind from movement; for movement is, as we
saw, an activity of what is imperfect, activity in the unqualified
sense, i.e. that of what has been perfected, is different from movement.

To perceive then is like bare asserting or knowing; but when the object
is pleasant or painful, the soul makes a quasi-affirmation or negation,
and pursues or avoids the object. To feel pleasure or pain is to act
with the sensitive mean towards what is good or bad as such. Both
avoidance and appetite when actual are identical with this: the faculty
of appetite and avoidance are not different, either from one another
or from the faculty of sense-perception; but their being is different.

To the thinking soul images serve as if they were contents of perception
(and when it asserts or denies them to be good or bad it avoids or
pursues them). That is why the soul never thinks without an image.
The process is like that in which the air modifies the pupil in this
or that way and the pupil transmits the modification to some third
thing (and similarly in hearing), while the ultimate point of arrival
is one, a single mean, with different manners of being. 

With what part of itself the soul discriminates sweet from hot I have
explained before and must now describe again as follows: That with
which it does so is a sort of unity, but in the way just mentioned,
i.e. as a connecting term. And the two faculties it connects, being
one by analogy and numerically, are each to each as the qualities
discerned are to one another (for what difference does it make whether
we raise the problem of discrimination between disparates or between
contraries, e.g. white and black?). Let then C be to D as is to B:
it follows alternando that C: A:: D: B. If then C and D belong to
one subject, the case will be the same with them as with and B; and
B form a single identity with different modes of being; so too will
the former pair. The same reasoning holds if be sweet and B white.

The faculty of thinking then thinks the forms in the images, and as
in the former case what is to be pursued or avoided is marked out
for it, so where there is no sensation and it is engaged upon the
images it is moved to pursuit or avoidance. E.g.. perceiving by sense
that the beacon is fire, it recognizes in virtue of the general faculty
of sense that it signifies an enemy, because it sees it moving; but
sometimes by means of the images or thoughts which are within the
soul, just as if it were seeing, it calculates and deliberates what
is to come by reference to what is present; and when it makes a pronouncement,
as in the case of sensation it pronounces the object to be pleasant
or painful, in this case it avoids or persues and so generally in
cases of action. 

That too which involves no action, i.e. that which is true or false,
is in the same province with what is good or bad: yet they differ
in this, that the one set imply and the other do not a reference to
a particular person. 

The so-called abstract objects the mind thinks just as, if one had
thought of the snubnosed not as snub-nosed but as hollow, one would
have thought of an actuality without the flesh in which it is embodied:
it is thus that the mind when it is thinking the objects of Mathematics
thinks as separate elements which do not exist separate. In every
case the mind which is actively thinking is the objects which it thinks.
Whether it is possible for it while not existing separate from spatial
conditions to think anything that is separate, or not, we must consider
later. 

Part 8

Let us now summarize our results about soul, and repeat that the soul
is in a way all existing things; for existing things are either sensible
or thinkable, and knowledge is in a way what is knowable, and sensation
is in a way what is sensible: in what way we must inquire.

Knowledge and sensation are divided to correspond with the realities,
potential knowledge and sensation answering to potentialities, actual
knowledge and sensation to actualities. Within the soul the faculties
of knowledge and sensation are potentially these objects, the one
what is knowable, the other what is sensible. They must be either
the things themselves or their forms. The former alternative is of
course impossible: it is not the stone which is present in the soul
but its form. 

It follows that the soul is analogous to the hand; for as the hand
is a tool of tools, so the mind is the form of forms and sense the
form of sensible things. 

Since according to common agreement there is nothing outside and separate
in existence from sensible spatial magnitudes, the objects of thought
are in the sensible forms, viz. both the abstract objects and all
the states and affections of sensible things. Hence (1) no one can
learn or understand anything in the absence of sense, and (when the
mind is actively aware of anything it is necessarily aware of it along
with an image; for images are like sensuous contents except in that
they contain no matter. 

Imagination is different from assertion and denial; for what is true
or false involves a synthesis of concepts. In what will the primary
concepts differ from images? Must we not say that neither these nor
even our other concepts are images, though they necessarily involve
them? 

Part 9

The soul of animals is characterized by two faculties, (a) the faculty
of discrimination which is the work of thought and sense, and (b)
the faculty of originating local movement. Sense and mind we have
now sufficiently examined. Let us next consider what it is in the
soul which originates movement. Is it a single part of the soul separate
either spatially or in definition? Or is it the soul as a whole? If
it is a part, is that part different from those usually distinguished
or already mentioned by us, or is it one of them? The problem at once
presents itself, in what sense we are to speak of parts of the soul,
or how many we should distinguish. For in a sense there is an infinity
of parts: it is not enough to distinguish, with some thinkers, the
calculative, the passionate, and the desiderative, or with others
the rational and the irrational; for if we take the dividing lines
followed by these thinkers we shall find parts far more distinctly
separated from one another than these, namely those we have just mentioned:
(1) the nutritive, which belongs both to plants and to all animals,
and (2) the sensitive, which cannot easily be classed as either irrational
or rational; further (3) the imaginative, which is, in its being,
different from all, while it is very hard to say with which of the
others it is the same or not the same, supposing we determine to posit
separate parts in the soul; and lastly (4) the appetitive, which would
seem to be distinct both in definition and in power from all hitherto
enumerated. 

It is absurd to break up the last-mentioned faculty: as these thinkers
do, for wish is found in the calculative part and desire and passion
in the irrational; and if the soul is tripartite appetite will be
found in all three parts. Turning our attention to the present object
of discussion, let us ask what that is which originates local movement
of the animal. 

The movement of growth and decay, being found in all living things,
must be attributed to the faculty of reproduction and nutrition, which
is common to all: inspiration and expiration, sleep and waking, we
must consider later: these too present much difficulty: at present
we must consider local movement, asking what it is that originates
forward movement in the animal. 

That it is not the nutritive faculty is obvious; for this kind of
movement is always for an end and is accompanied either by imagination
or by appetite; for no animal moves except by compulsion unless it
has an impulse towards or away from an object. Further, if it were
the nutritive faculty, even plants would have been capable of originating
such movement and would have possessed the organs necessary to carry
it out. Similarly it cannot be the sensitive faculty either; for there
are many animals which have sensibility but remain fast and immovable
throughout their lives. 

If then Nature never makes anything without a purpose and never leaves
out what is necessary (except in the case of mutilated or imperfect
growths; and that here we have neither mutilation nor imperfection
may be argued from the facts that such animals (a) can reproduce their
species and (b) rise to completeness of nature and decay to an end),
it follows that, had they been capable of originating forward movement,
they would have possessed the organs necessary for that purpose. Further,
neither can the calculative faculty or what is called 'mind' be the
cause of such movement; for mind as speculative never thinks what
is practicable, it never says anything about an object to be avoided
or pursued, while this movement is always in something which is avoiding
or pursuing an object. No, not even when it is aware of such an object
does it at once enjoin pursuit or avoidance of it; e.g. the mind often
thinks of something terrifying or pleasant without enjoining the emotion
of fear. It is the heart that is moved (or in the case of a pleasant
object some other part). Further, even when the mind does command
and thought bids us pursue or avoid something, sometimes no movement
is produced; we act in accordance with desire, as in the case of moral
weakness. And, generally, we observe that the possessor of medical
knowledge is not necessarily healing, which shows that something else
is required to produce action in accordance with knowledge; the knowledge
alone is not the cause. Lastly, appetite too is incompetent to account
fully for movement; for those who successfully resist temptation have
appetite and desire and yet follow mind and refuse to enact that for
which they have appetite. 

Part 10

These two at all events appear to be sources of movement: appetite
and mind (if one may venture to regard imagination as a kind of thinking;
for many men follow their imaginations contrary to knowledge, and
in all animals other than man there is no thinking or calculation
but only imagination). 

Both of these then are capable of originating local movement, mind
and appetite: (1) mind, that is, which calculates means to an end,
i.e. mind practical (it differs from mind speculative in the character
of its end); while (2) appetite is in every form of it relative to
an end: for that which is the object of appetite is the stimulant
of mind practical; and that which is last in the process of thinking
is the beginning of the action. It follows that there is a justification
for regarding these two as the sources of movement, i.e. appetite
and practical thought; for the object of appetite starts a movement
and as a result of that thought gives rise to movement, the object
of appetite being it a source of stimulation. So too when imagination
originates movement, it necessarily involves appetite. 

That which moves therefore is a single faculty and the faculty of
appetite; for if there had been two sources of movement-mind and appetite-they
would have produced movement in virtue of some common character. As
it is, mind is never found producing movement without appetite (for
wish is a form of appetite; and when movement is produced according
to calculation it is also according to wish), but appetite can originate
movement contrary to calculation, for desire is a form of appetite.
Now mind is always right, but appetite and imagination may be either
right or wrong. That is why, though in any case it is the object of
appetite which originates movement, this object may be either the
real or the apparent good. To produce movement the object must be
more than this: it must be good that can be brought into being by
action; and only what can be otherwise than as it is can thus be brought
into being. That then such a power in the soul as has been described,
i.e. that called appetite, originates movement is clear. Those who
distinguish parts in the soul, if they distinguish and divide in accordance
with differences of power, find themselves with a very large number
of parts, a nutritive, a sensitive, an intellective, a deliberative,
and now an appetitive part; for these are more different from one
another than the faculties of desire and passion. 

Since appetites run counter to one another, which happens when a principle
of reason and a desire are contrary and is possible only in beings
with a sense of time (for while mind bids us hold back because of
what is future, desire is influenced by what is just at hand: a pleasant
object which is just at hand presents itself as both pleasant and
good, without condition in either case, because of want of foresight
into what is farther away in time), it follows that while that which
originates movement must be specifically one, viz. the faculty of
appetite as such (or rather farthest back of all the object of that
faculty; for it is it that itself remaining unmoved originates the
movement by being apprehended in thought or imagination), the things
that originate movement are numerically many. 

All movement involves three factors, (1) that which originates the
movement, (2) that by means of which it originates it, and (3) that
which is moved. The expression 'that which originates the movement'
is ambiguous: it may mean either (a) something which itself is unmoved
or (b) that which at once moves and is moved. Here that which moves
without itself being moved is the realizable good, that which at once
moves and is moved is the faculty of appetite (for that which is influenced
by appetite so far as it is actually so influenced is set in movement,
and appetite in the sense of actual appetite is a kind of movement),
while that which is in motion is the animal. The instrument which
appetite employs to produce movement is no longer psychical but bodily:
hence the examination of it falls within the province of the functions
common to body and soul. To state the matter summarily at present,
that which is the instrument in the production of movement is to be
found where a beginning and an end coincide as e.g. in a ball and
socket joint; for there the convex and the concave sides are respectively
an end and a beginning (that is why while the one remains at rest,
the other is moved): they are separate in definition but not separable
spatially. For everything is moved by pushing and pulling. Hence just
as in the case of a wheel, so here there must be a point which remains
at rest, and from that point the movement must originate.

To sum up, then, and repeat what I have said, inasmuch as an animal
is capable of appetite it is capable of self-movement; it is not capable
of appetite without possessing imagination; and all imagination is
either (1) calculative or (2) sensitive. In the latter an animals,
and not only man, partake. 

Part 11

We must consider also in the case of imperfect animals, sc. those
which have no sense but touch, what it is that in them originates
movement. Can they have imagination or not? or desire? Clearly they
have feelings of pleasure and pain, and if they have these they must
have desire. But how can they have imagination? Must not we say that,
as their movements are indefinite, they have imagination and desire,
but indefinitely? 

Sensitive imagination, as we have said, is found in all animals, deliberative
imagination only in those that are calculative: for whether this or
that shall be enacted is already a task requiring calculation; and
there must be a single standard to measure by, for that is pursued
which is greater. It follows that what acts in this way must be able
to make a unity out of several images. 

This is the reason why imagination is held not to involve opinion,
in that it does not involve opinion based on inference, though opinion
involves imagination. Hence appetite contains no deliberative element.
Sometimes it overpowers wish and sets it in movement: at times wish
acts thus upon appetite, like one sphere imparting its movement to
another, or appetite acts thus upon appetite, i.e. in the condition
of moral weakness (though by nature the higher faculty is always more
authoritative and gives rise to movement). Thus three modes of movement
are possible. 

The faculty of knowing is never moved but remains at rest. Since the
one premiss or judgement is universal and the other deals with the
particular (for the first tells us that such and such a kind of man
should do such and such a kind of act, and the second that this is
an act of the kind meant, and I a person of the type intended), it
is the latter opinion that really originates movement, not the universal;
or rather it is both, but the one does so while it remains in a state
more like rest, while the other partakes in movement. 

Part 12

The nutritive soul then must be possessed by everything that is alive,
and every such thing is endowed with soul from its birth to its death.
For what has been born must grow, reach maturity, and decay-all of
which are impossible without nutrition. Therefore the nutritive faculty
must be found in everything that grows and decays. 

But sensation need not be found in all things that live. For it is
impossible for touch to belong either (1) to those whose body is uncompounded
or (2) to those which are incapable of taking in the forms without
their matter. 

But animals must be endowed with sensation, since Nature does nothing
in vain. For all things that exist by Nature are means to an end,
or will be concomitants of means to an end. Every body capable of
forward movement would, if unendowed with sensation, perish and fail
to reach its end, which is the aim of Nature; for how could it obtain
nutriment? Stationary living things, it is true, have as their nutriment
that from which they have arisen; but it is not possible that a body
which is not stationary but produced by generation should have a soul
and a discerning mind without also having sensation. (Nor yet even
if it were not produced by generation. Why should it not have sensation?
Because it were better so either for the body or for the soul? But
clearly it would not be better for either: the absence of sensation
will not enable the one to think better or the other to exist better.)
Therefore no body which is not stationary has soul without sensation.

But if a body has sensation, it must be either simple or compound.
And simple it cannot be; for then it could not have touch, which is
indispensable. This is clear from what follows. An animal is a body
with soul in it: every body is tangible, i.e. perceptible by touch;
hence necessarily, if an animal is to survive, its body must have
tactual sensation. All the other senses, e.g. smell, sight, hearing,
apprehend through media; but where there is immediate contact the
animal, if it has no sensation, will be unable to avoid some things
and take others, and so will find it impossible to survive. That is
why taste also is a sort of touch; it is relative to nutriment, which
is just tangible body; whereas sound, colour, and odour are innutritious,
and further neither grow nor decay. Hence it is that taste also must
be a sort of touch, because it is the sense for what is tangible and
nutritious. 

Both these senses, then, are indispensable to the animal, and it is
clear that without touch it is impossible for an animal to be. All
the other senses subserve well-being and for that very reason belong
not to any and every kind of animal, but only to some, e.g. those
capable of forward movement must have them; for, if they are to survive,
they must perceive not only by immediate contact but also at a distance
from the object. This will be possible if they can perceive through
a medium, the medium being affected and moved by the perceptible object,
and the animal by the medium. just as that which produces local movement
causes a change extending to a certain point, and that which gave
an impulse causes another to produce a new impulse so that the movement
traverses a medium the first mover impelling without being impelled,
the last moved being impelled without impelling, while the medium
(or media, for there are many) is both-so is it also in the case of
alteration, except that the agent produces produces it without the
patient's changing its place. Thus if an object is dipped into wax,
the movement goes on until submersion has taken place, and in stone
it goes no distance at all, while in water the disturbance goes far
beyond the object dipped: in air the disturbance is propagated farthest
of all, the air acting and being acted upon, so long as it maintains
an unbroken unity. That is why in the case of reflection it is better,
instead of saying that the sight issues from the eye and is reflected,
to say that the air, so long as it remains one, is affected by the
shape and colour. On a smooth surface the air possesses unity; hence
it is that it in turn sets the sight in motion, just as if the impression
on the wax were transmitted as far as the wax extends. 

Part 13

It is clear that the body of an animal cannot be simple, i.e. consist
of one element such as fire or air. For without touch it is impossible
to have any other sense; for every body that has soul in it must,
as we have said, be capable of touch. All the other elements with
the exception of earth can constitute organs of sense, but all of
them bring about perception only through something else, viz. through
the media. Touch takes place by direct contact with its objects, whence
also its name. All the other organs of sense, no doubt, perceive by
contact, only the contact is mediate: touch alone perceives by immediate
contact. Consequently no animal body can consist of these other elements.

Nor can it consist solely of earth. For touch is as it were a mean
between all tangible qualities, and its organ is capable of receiving
not only all the specific qualities which characterize earth, but
also the hot and the cold and all other tangible qualities whatsoever.
That is why we have no sensation by means of bones, hair, &c., because
they consist of earth. So too plants, because they consist of earth,
have no sensation. Without touch there can be no other sense, and
the organ of touch cannot consist of earth or of any other single
element. 

It is evident, therefore, that the loss of this one sense alone must
bring about the death of an animal. For as on the one hand nothing
which is not an animal can have this sense, so on the other it is
the only one which is indispensably necessary to what is an animal.
This explains, further, the following difference between the other
senses and touch. In the case of all the others excess of intensity
in the qualities which they apprehend, i.e. excess of intensity in
colour, sound, and smell, destroys not the but only the organs of
the sense (except incidentally, as when the sound is accompanied by
an impact or shock, or where through the objects of sight or of smell
certain other things are set in motion, which destroy by contact);
flavour also destroys only in so far as it is at the same time tangible.
But excess of intensity in tangible qualities, e.g. heat, cold, or
hardness, destroys the animal itself. As in the case of every sensible
quality excess destroys the organ, so here what is tangible destroys
touch, which is the essential mark of life; for it has been shown
that without touch it is impossible for an animal to be. That is why
excess in intensity of tangible qualities destroys not merely the
organ, but the animal itself, because this is the only sense which
it must have. 

All the other senses are necessary to animals, as we have said, not
for their being, but for their well-being. Such, e.g. is sight, which,
since it lives in air or water, or generally in what is pellucid,
it must have in order to see, and taste because of what is pleasant
or painful to it, in order that it may perceive these qualities in
its nutriment and so may desire to be set in motion, and hearing that
it may have communication made to it, and a tongue that it may communicate
with its fellows. 

THE END

BOOK I

Part 1 

Our treatise proposes to find a line of inquiry whereby we shall
be able to reason from opinions that are generally accepted about
every problem propounded to us, and also shall ourselves, when standing
up to an argument, avoid saying anything that will obstruct us. First,
then, we must say what reasoning is, and what its varieties are, in
order to grasp dialectical reasoning: for this is the object of our
search in the treatise before us. 

Now reasoning is an argument in which, certain things being laid down,
something other than these necessarily comes about through them. (a)
It is a 'demonstration', when the premisses from which the reasoning
starts are true and primary, or are such that our knowledge of them
has originally come through premisses which are primary and true:
(b) reasoning, on the other hand, is 'dialectical', if it reasons
from opinions that are generally accepted. Things are 'true' and 'primary'
which are believed on the strength not of anything else but of themselves:
for in regard to the first principles of science it is improper to
ask any further for the why and wherefore of them; each of the first
principles should command belief in and by itself. On the other hand,
those opinions are 'generally accepted' which are accepted by every
one or by the majority or by the philosophers-i.e. by all, or by the
majority, or by the most notable and illustrious of them. Again (c),
reasoning is 'contentious' if it starts from opinions that seem to
be generally accepted, but are not really such, or again if it merely
seems to reason from opinions that are or seem to be generally accepted.
For not every opinion that seems to be generally accepted actually
is generally accepted. For in none of the opinions which we call generally
accepted is the illusion entirely on the surface, as happens in the
case of the principles of contentious arguments; for the nature of
the fallacy in these is obvious immediately, and as a rule even to
persons with little power of comprehension. So then, of the contentious
reasonings mentioned, the former really deserves to be called 'reasoning'
as well, but the other should be called 'contentious reasoning', but
not 'reasoning', since it appears to reason, but does not really do
so. Further (d), besides all the reasonings we have mentioned there
are the mis-reasonings that start from the premisses peculiar to the
special sciences, as happens (for example) in the case of geometry
and her sister sciences. For this form of reasoning appears to differ
from the reasonings mentioned above; the man who draws a false figure
reasons from things that are neither true and primary, nor yet generally
accepted. For he does not fall within the definition; he does not
assume opinions that are received either by every one or by the majority
or by philosophers-that is to say, by all, or by most, or by the most
illustrious of them-but he conducts his reasoning upon assumptions
which, though appropriate to the science in question, are not true;
for he effects his mis-reasoning either by describing the semicircles
wrongly or by drawing certain lines in a way in which they could not
be drawn. 

The foregoing must stand for an outline survey of the species of reasoning.
In general, in regard both to all that we have already discussed and
to those which we shall discuss later, we may remark that that amount
of distinction between them may serve, because it is not our purpose
to give the exact definition of any of them; we merely want to describe
them in outline; we consider it quite enough from the point of view
of the line of inquiry before us to be able to recognize each of them
in some sort of way. 

Part 2

Next in order after the foregoing, we must say for how many and for
what purposes the treatise is useful. They are three-intellectual
training, casual encounters, and the philosophical sciences. That
it is useful as a training is obvious on the face of it. The possession
of a plan of inquiry will enable us more easily to argue about the
subject proposed. For purposes of casual encounters, it is useful
because when we have counted up the opinions held by most people,
we shall meet them on the ground not of other people's convictions
but of their own, while we shift the ground of any argument that they
appear to us to state unsoundly. For the study of the philosophical
sciences it is useful, because the ability to raise searching difficulties
on both sides of a subject will make us detect more easily the truth
and error about the several points that arise. It has a further use
in relation to the ultimate bases of the principles used in the several
sciences. For it is impossible to discuss them at all from the principles
proper to the particular science in hand, seeing that the principles
are the prius of everything else: it is through the opinions generally
held on the particular points that these have to be discussed, and
this task belongs properly, or most appropriately, to dialectic: for
dialectic is a process of criticism wherein lies the path to the principles
of all inquiries. 

Part 3

We shall be in perfect possession of the way to proceed when we are
in a position like that which we occupy in regard to rhetoric and
medicine and faculties of that kind: this means the doing of that
which we choose with the materials that are available. For it is not
every method that the rhetorician will employ to persuade, or the
doctor to heal; still, if he omits none of the available means, we
shall say that his grasp of the science is adequate. 

Part 4

First, then, we must see of what parts our inquiry consists. Now if
we were to grasp (a) with reference to how many, and what kind of,
things arguments take place, and with what materials they start, and
(h) how we are to become well supplied with these, we should have
sufficiently won our goal. Now the materials with which arguments
start are equal in number, and are identical, with the subjects on
which reasonings take place. For arguments start with 'propositions',
while the subjects on which reasonings take place are 'problems'.
Now every proposition and every problem indicates either a genus or
a peculiarity or an accident-for the differentia too, applying as
it does to a class (or genus), should be ranked together with the
genus. Since, however, of what is peculiar to anything part signifies
its essence, while part does not, let us divide the 'peculiar' into
both the aforesaid parts, and call that part which indicates the essence
a 'definition', while of the remainder let us adopt the terminology
which is generally current about these things, and speak of it as
a 'property'. What we have said, then, makes it clear that according
to our present division, the elements turn out to be four, all told,
namely either property or definition or genus or accident. Do not
let any one suppose us to mean that each of these enunciated by itself
constitutes a proposition or problem, but only that it is from these
that both problems and propositions are formed. The difference between
a problem and a proposition is a difference in the turn of the phrase.
For if it be put in this way, "'An animal that walks on two feet"
is the definition of man, is it not?' or '"Animal" is the genus of
man, is it not?' the result is a proposition: but if thus, 'Is "an
animal that walks on two feet" a definition of man or no?' [or 'Is
"animal" his genus or no?'] the result is a problem. Similarly too
in other cases. Naturally, then, problems and propositions are equal
in number: for out of every proposition you will make a problem if
you change the turn of the phrase. 

Part 5

We must now say what are 'definition', 'property', 'genus', and 'accident'.
A 'definition' is a phrase signifying a thing's essence. It is rendered
in the form either of a phrase in lieu of a term, or of a phrase in
lieu of another phrase; for it is sometimes possible to define the
meaning of a phrase as well. People whose rendering consists of a
term only, try it as they may, clearly do not render the definition
of the thing in question, because a definition is always a phrase
of a certain kind. One may, however, use the word 'definitory' also
of such a remark as 'The "becoming" is "beautiful"', and likewise
also of the question, 'Are sensation and knowledge the same or different?',
for argument about definitions is mostly concerned with questions
of sameness and difference. In a word we may call 'definitory' everything
that falls under the same branch of inquiry as definitions; and that
all the above-mentioned examples are of this character is clear on
the face of them. For if we are able to argue that two things are
the same or are different, we shall be well supplied by the same turn
of argument with lines of attack upon their definitions as well: for
when we have shown that they are not the same we shall have demolished
the definition. Observe, please, that the converse of this last statement
does not hold: for to show that they are the same is not enough to
establish a definition. To show, however, that they are not the same
is enough of itself to overthrow it. 

A 'property' is a predicate which does not indicate the essence of
a thing, but yet belongs to that thing alone, and is predicated convertibly
of it. Thus it is a property of man to-be-capable of learning grammar:
for if A be a man, then he is capable of learning grammar, and if
he be capable of learning grammar, he is a man. For no one calls anything
a 'property' which may possibly belong to something else, e.g. 'sleep'
in the case of man, even though at a certain time it may happen to
belong to him alone. That is to say, if any such thing were actually
to be called a property, it will be called not a 'property' absolutely,
but a 'temporary' or a 'relative' property: for 'being on the right
hand side' is a temporary property, while 'two-footed' is in point
of fact ascribed as a property in certain relations; e.g. it is a
property of man relatively to a horse and a dog. That nothing which
may belong to anything else than A is a convertible predicate of A
is clear: for it does not necessarily follow that if something is
asleep it is a man. 

A 'genus' is what is predicated in the category of essence of a number
of things exhibiting differences in kind. We should treat as predicates
in the category of essence all such things as it would be appropriate
to mention in reply to the question, 'What is the object before you?';
as, for example, in the case of man, if asked that question, it is
appropriate to say 'He is an animal'. The question, 'Is one thing
in the same genus as another or in a different one?' is also a 'generic'
question; for a question of that kind as well falls under the same
branch of inquiry as the genus: for having argued that 'animal' is
the genus of man, and likewise also of ox, we shall have argued that
they are in the same genus; whereas if we show that it is the genus
of the one but not of the other, we shall have argued that these things
are not in the same genus. 

An 'accident' is (i) something which, though it is none of the foregoing-i.e.
neither a definition nor a property nor a genus yet belongs to the
thing: (something which may possibly either belong or not belong to
any one and the self-same thing, as (e.g.) the 'sitting posture' may
belong or not belong to some self-same thing. Likewise also 'whiteness',
for there is nothing to prevent the same thing being at one time white,
and at another not white. Of the definitions of accident the second
is the better: for if he adopts the first, any one is bound, if he
is to understand it, to know already what 'definition' and 'genus'
and 'property' are, whereas the second is sufficient of itself to
tell us the essential meaning of the term in question. To Accident
are to be attached also all comparisons of things together, when expressed
in language that is drawn in any kind of way from what happens (accidit)
to be true of them; such as, for example, the question, 'Is the honourable
or the expedient preferable?' and 'Is the life of virtue or the life
of self-indulgence the pleasanter?', and any other problem which may
happen to be phrased in terms like these. For in all such cases the
question is 'to which of the two does the predicate in question happen
(accidit) to belong more closely?' It is clear on the face of it that
there is nothing to prevent an accident from becoming a temporary
or relative property. Thus the sitting posture is an accident, but
will be a temporary property, whenever a man is the only person sitting,
while if he be not the only one sitting, it is still a property relatively
to those who are not sitting. So then, there is nothing to prevent
an accident from becoming both a relative and a temporary property;
but a property absolutely it will never be. 

Part 6

We must not fail to observe that all remarks made in criticism of
a 'property' and 'genus' and 'accident' will be applicable to 'definitions'
as well. For when we have shown that the attribute in question fails
to belong only to the term defined, as we do also in the case of a
property, or that the genus rendered in the definition is not the
true genus, or that any of the things mentioned in the phrase used
does not belong, as would be remarked also in the case of an accident,
we shall have demolished the definition; so that, to use the phrase
previously employed,' all the points we have enumerated might in a
certain sense be called 'definitory'. But we must not on this account
expect to find a single line of inquiry which will apply universally
to them all: for this is not an easy thing to find, and, even were
one found, it would be very obscure indeed, and of little service
for the treatise before us. Rather, a special plan of inquiry must
be laid down for each of the classes we have distinguished, and then,
starting from the rules that are appropriate in each case, it will
probably be easier to make our way right through the task before us.
So then, as was said before,' we must outline a division of our subject,
and other questions we must relegate each to the particular branch
to which it most naturally belongs, speaking of them as 'definitory'
and 'generic' questions. The questions I mean have practically been
already assigned to their several branches. 

Part 7

First of all we must define the number of senses borne by the term
'Sameness'. Sameness would be generally regarded as falling, roughly
speaking, into three divisions. We generally apply the term numerically
or specifically or generically-numerically in cases where there is
more than one name but only one thing, e.g. 'doublet' and 'cloak';
specifically, where there is more than one thing, but they present
no differences in respect of their species, as one man and another,
or one horse and another: for things like this that fall under the
same species are said to be 'specifically the same'. Similarly, too,
those things are called generically the same which fall under the
same genus, such as a horse and a man. It might appear that the sense
in which water from the same spring is called 'the same water' is
somehow different and unlike the senses mentioned above: but really
such a case as this ought to be ranked in the same class with the
things that in one way or another are called 'the same' in view of
unity of species. For all such things seem to be of one family and
to resemble one another. For the reaon why all water is said to be
specifically the same as all other water is because of a certain likeness
it bears to it, and the only difference in the case of water drawn
from the same spring is this, that the likeness is more emphatic:
that is why we do not distinguish it from the things that in one way
or another are called 'the same' in view of unity of species. It is
generally supposed that the term 'the same' is most used in a sense
agreed on by every one when applied to what is numerically one. But
even so, it is apt to be rendered in more than one sense; its most
literal and primary use is found whenever the sameness is rendered
in reference to an alternative name or definition, as when a cloak
is said to be the same as a doublet, or an animal that walks on two
feet is said to be the same as a man: a second sense is when it is
rendered in reference to a property, as when what can acquire knowledge
is called the same as a man, and what naturally travels upward the
same as fire: while a third use is found when it is rendered in reference
to some term drawn from Accident, as when the creature who is sitting,
or who is musical, is called the same as Socrates. For all these uses
mean to signify numerical unity. That what I have just said is true
may be best seen where one form of appellation is substituted for
another. For often when we give the order to call one of the people
who are sitting down, indicating him by name, we change our description,
whenever the person to whom we give the order happens not to understand
us; he will, we think, understand better from some accidental feature;
so we bid him call to us 'the man who is sitting' or 'who is conversing
over there'-clearly supposing ourselves to be indicating the same
object by its name and by its accident. 

Part 8

Of 'sameness' then, as has been said,' three senses are to be distinguished.
Now one way to confirm that the elements mentioned above are those
out of which and through which and to which arguments proceed, is
by induction: for if any one were to survey propositions and problems
one by one, it would be seen that each was formed either from the
definition of something or from its property or from its genus or
from its accident. Another way to confirm it is through reasoning.
For every predicate of a subject must of necessity be either convertible
with its subject or not: and if it is convertible, it would be its
definition or property, for if it signifies the essence, it is the
definition; if not, it is a property: for this was what a property
is, viz. what is predicated convertibly, but does not signify the
essence. If, on the other hand, it is not predicated convertibly of
the thing, it either is or is not one of the terms contained in the
definition of the subject: and if it be one of those terms, then it
will be the genus or the differentia, inasmuch as the definition consists
of genus and differentiae; whereas, if it be not one of those terms,
clearly it would be an accident, for accident was said' to be what
belongs as an attribute to a subject without being either its definition
or its genus or a property. 

Part 9

Next, then, we must distinguish between the classes of predicates
in which the four orders in question are found. These are ten in number:
Essence, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Place, Time, Position, State,
Activity, Passivity. For the accident and genus and property and definition
of anything will always be in one of these categories: for all the
propositions found through these signify either something's essence
or its quality or quantity or some one of the other types of predicate.
It is clear, too, on the face of it that the man who signifies something's
essence signifies sometimes a substance, sometimes a quality, sometimes
some one of the other types of predicate. For when man is set before
him and he says that what is set there is 'a man' or 'an animal',
he states its essence and signifies a substance; but when a white
colour is set before him and he says that what is set there is 'white'
or is 'a colour', he states its essence and signifies a quality. Likewise,
also, if a magnitude of a cubit be set before him and he says that
what is set there is a magnitude of a cubit, he will be describing
its essence and signifying a quantity. Likewise, also, in the other
cases: for each of these kinds of predicate, if either it be asserted
of itself, or its genus be asserted of it, signifies an essence: if,
on the other hand, one kind of predicate is asserted of another kind,
it does not signify an essence, but a quantity or a quality or one
of the other kinds of predicate. Such, then, and so many, are the
subjects on which arguments take place, and the materials with which
they start. How we are to acquire them, and by what means we are to
become well supplied with them, falls next to be told. 

Part 10

First, then, a definition must be given of a 'dialectical proposition'
and a 'dialectical problem'. For it is not every proposition nor yet
every problem that is to be set down as dialectical: for no one in
his senses would make a proposition of what no one holds, nor yet
make a problem of what is obvious to everybody or to most people:
for the latter admits of no doubt, while to the former no one would
assent. Now a dialectical proposition consists in asking something
that is held by all men or by most men or by the philosophers, i.e.
either by all, or by most, or by the most notable of these, provided
it be not contrary to the general opinion; for a man would probably
assent to the view of the philosophers, if it be not contrary to the
opinions of most men. Dialectical propositions also include views
which are like those generally accepted; also propositions which contradict
the contraries of opinions that are taken to be generally accepted,
and also all opinions that are in accordance with the recognized arts.
Thus, supposing it to be a general opinion that the knowledge of contraries
is the same, it might probably pass for a general opinion also that
the perception of contraries is the same: also, supposing it to be
a general opinion that there is but one single science of grammar,
it might pass for a general opinion that there is but one science
of flute-playing as well, whereas, if it be a general opinion that
there is more than one science of grammar, it might pass for a general
opinion that there is more than one science of flute-playing as well:
for all these seem to be alike and akin. Likewise, also, propositions
contradicting the contraries of general opinions will pass as general
opinions: for if it be a general opinion that one ought to do good
to one's friends, it will also be a general opinion that one ought
not to do them harm. Here, that one ought to do harm to one's friends
is contrary to the general view, and that one ought not to do them
harm is the contradictory of that contrary. Likewise also, if one
ought to do good to one's friends, one ought not to do good to one's
enemies: this too is the contradictory of the view contrary to the
general view; the contrary being that one ought to do good to one's
enemies. Likewise, also, in other cases. Also, on comparison, it will
look like a general opinion that the contrary predicate belongs to
the contrary subject: e.g. if one ought to do good to one's friends,
one ought also to do evil to one's enemies. it might appear also as
if doing good to one's friends were a contrary to doing evil to one's
enemies: but whether this is or is not so in reality as well will
be stated in the course of the discussion upon contraries. Clearly
also, all opinions that are in accordance with the arts are dialectical
propositions; for people are likely to assent to the views held by
those who have made a study of these things, e.g. on a question of
medicine they will agree with the doctor, and on a question of geometry
with the geometrician; and likewise also in other cases.

Part 11

A dialectical problem is a subject of inquiry that contributes either
to choice and avoidance, or to truth and knowledge, and that either
by itself, or as a help to the solution of some other such problem.
It must, moreover, be something on which either people hold no opinion
either way, or the masses hold a contrary opinion to the philosophers,
or the philosophers to the masses, or each of them among themselves.
For some problems it is useful to know with a view to choice or avoidance,
e.g. whether pleasure is to be chosen or not, while some it is useful
to know merely with a view to knowledge, e.g. whether the universe
is eternal or not: others, again, are not useful in and by themselves
for either of these purposes, but yet help us in regard to some such
problems; for there are many things which we do not wish to know in
and by themselves, but for the sake of other things, in order that
through them we may come to know something else. Problems also include
questions in regard to which reasonings conflict (the difficulty then
being whether so-and so is so or not, there being convincing arguments
for both views); others also in regard to which we have no argument
because they are so vast, and we find it difficult to give our reasons,
e.g. the question whether the universe is eternal or no: for into
questions of that kind too it is possible to inquire. 

Problems, then, and propositions are to be defined as aforesaid. A
'thesis' is a supposition of some eminent philosopher that conflicts
with the general opinion; e.g. the view that contradiction is impossible,
as Antisthenes said; or the view of Heraclitus that all things are
in motion; or that Being is one, as Melissus says: for to take notice
when any ordinary person expresses views contrary to men's usual opinions
would be silly. Or it may be a view about which we have a reasoned
theory contrary to men's usual opinions, e.g. the view maintained
by the sophists that what is need not in every case either have come
to be or be eternal: for a musician who is a grammarian 'is' so without
ever having 'come to be' so, or being so eternally. For even if a
man does not accept this view, he might do so on the ground that it
is reasonable. 

Now a 'thesis' also is a problem, though a problem is not always a
thesis, inasmuch as some problems are such that we have no opinion
about them either way. That a thesis, however, also forms a problem,
is clear: for it follows of necessity from what has been said that
either the mass of men disagree with the philosophers about the thesis,
or that the one or the other class disagree among themselves, seeing
that the thesis is a supposition in conflict with general opinion.
Practically all dialectical problems indeed are now called 'theses'.
But it should make no difference whichever description is used; for
our object in thus distinguishing them has not been to create a terminology,
but to recognize what differences happen to be found between them.

Not every problem, nor every thesis, should be examined, but only
one which might puzzle one of those who need argument, not punishment
or perception. For people who are puzzled to know whether one ought
to honour the gods and love one's parents or not need punishment,
while those who are puzzled to know whether snow is white or not need
perception. The subjects should not border too closely upon the sphere
of demonstration, nor yet be too far removed from it: for the former
cases admit of no doubt, while the latter involve difficulties too
great for the art of the trainer. 

Part 12

Having drawn these definitions, we must distinguish how many species
there are of dialectical arguments. There is on the one hand Induction,
on the other Reasoning. Now what reasoning is has been said before:
induction is a passage from individuals to universals, e.g. the argument
that supposing the skilled pilot is the most effective, and likewise
the skilled charioteer, then in general the skilled man is the best
at his particular task. Induction is the more convincing and clear:
it is more readily learnt by the use of the senses, and is applicable
generally to the mass of men, though reasoning is more forcible and
effective against contradictious people. 

Part 13

The classes, then, of things about which, and of things out of which,
arguments are constructed, are to be distinguished in the way we have
said before. The means whereby we are to become well supplied with
reasonings are four: (1) the securing of propositions; (2) the power
to distinguish in how many senses particular expression is used; (3)
the discovery of the differences of things; (4) the investigation
of likeness. The last three, as well, are in a certain sense propositions:
for it is possible to make a proposition corresponding to each of
them, e.g. (1) 'The desirable may mean either the honourable or the
pleasant or the expedient'; and (2) Sensation differs from knowledge
in that the latter may be recovered again after it has been lost,
while the former cannot'; and (3) The relation of the healthy to health
is like that of the vigorous to vigour'. The first proposition depends
upon the use of one term in several senses, the second upon the differences
of things, the third upon their likenesses. 

Part 14

Propositions should be selected in a number of ways corresponding
to the number of distinctions drawn in regard to the proposition:
thus one may first take in hand the opinions held by all or by most
men or by the philosophers, i.e. by all, or most, or the most notable
of them; or opinions contrary to those that seem to be generally held;
and, again, all opinions that are in accordance with the arts. We
must make propositions also of the contradictories of opinions contrary
to those that seem to be generally held, as was laid down before.
It is useful also to make them by selecting not only those opinions
that actually are accepted, but also those that are like these, e.g.
'The perception of contraries is the same'-the knowledge of them being
so-and 'we see by admission of something into ourselves, not by an
emission'; for so it is, too, in the case of the other senses; for
in hearing we admit something into ourselves; we do not emit; and
we taste in the same way. Likewise also in the other cases. Moreover,
all statements that seem to be true in all or in most cases, should
be taken as a principle or accepted position; for they are posited
by those who do not also see what exception there may be. We should
select also from the written handbooks of argument, and should draw
up sketch-lists of them upon each several kind of subject, putting
them down under separate headings, e.g. 'On Good', or 'On Life'-and
that 'On Good' should deal with every form of good, beginning with
the category of essence. In the margin, too, one should indicate also
the opinions of individual thinkers, e.g. 'Empedocles said that the
elements of bodies were four': for any one might assent to the saying
of some generally accepted authority. 

Of propositions and problems there are-to comprehend the matter in
outline-three divisions: for some are ethical propositions, some are
on natural philosophy, while some are logical. Propositions such as
the following are ethical, e.g. 'Ought one rather to obey one's parents
or the laws, if they disagree?'; such as this are logical, e.g. 'Is
the knowledge of opposites the same or not?'; while such as this are
on natural philosophy, e.g. 'Is the universe eternal or not?' Likewise
also with problems. The nature of each of the aforesaid kinds of proposition
is not easily rendered in a definition, but we have to try to recognize
each of them by means of the familiarity attained through induction,
examining them in the light of the illustrations given above.

For purposes of philosophy we must treat of these things according
to their truth, but for dialectic only with an eye to general opinion.
All propositions should be taken in their most universal form; then,
the one should be made into many. E.g. 'The knowledge of opposites
is the same'; next, 'The knowledge of contraries is the same', and
that 'of relative terms'. In the same way these two should again be
divided, as long as division is possible, e.g. the knowledge of 'good
and evil', of 'white and black', or 'cold and hot'. Likewise also
in other cases. 

Part 15

On the formation, then, of propositions, the above remarks are enough.
As regards the number of senses a term bears, we must not only treat
of those terms which bear different senses, but we must also try to
render their definitions; e.g. we must not merely say that justice
and courage are called 'good' in one sense, and that what conduces
to vigour and what conduces to health are called so in another, but
also that the former are so called because of a certain intrinsic
quality they themselves have, the latter because they are productive
of a certain result and not because of any intrinsic quality in themselves.
Similarly also in other cases. 

Whether a term bears a number of specific meanings or one only, may
be considered by the following means. First, look and see if its contrary
bears a number of meanings, whether the discrepancy between them be
one of kind or one of names. For in some cases a difference is at
once displayed even in the names; e.g. the contrary of 'sharp' in
the case of a note is 'flat', while in the case of a solid edge it
is 'dull'. Clearly, then, the contrary of 'sharp' bears several meanings,
and if so, also does 'sharp'; for corresponding to each of the former
terms the meaning of its contrary will be different. For 'sharp' will
not be the same when contrary to 'dull' and to 'flat', though 'sharp'
is the contrary of each. Again Barhu ('flat', 'heavy') in the case
of a note has 'sharp' as its contrary, but in the case of a solid
mass 'light', so that Barhu is used with a number of meanings, inasmuch
as its contrary also is so used. Likewise, also, 'fine' as applied
to a picture has 'ugly' as its contrary, but, as applied to a house,
'ramshackle'; so that 'fine' is an ambiguous term. 

In some cases there is no discrepancy of any sort in the names used,
but a difference of kind between the meanings is at once obvious:
e.g. in the case of 'clear' and 'obscure': for sound is called 'clear'
and 'obscure', just as 'colour' is too. As regards the names, then,
there is no discrepancy, but the difference in kind between the meanings
is at once obvious: for colour is not called 'clear' in a like sense
to sound. This is plain also through sensation: for of things that
are the same in kind we have the same sensation, whereas we do not
judge clearness by the same sensation in the case of sound and of
colour, but in the latter case we judge by sight, in the former by
hearing. Likewise also with 'sharp' and 'dull' in regard to flavours
and solid edges: here in the latter case we judge by touch, but in
the former by taste. For here again there is no discrepancy in the
names used, in the case either of the original terms or of their contraries:
for the contrary also of sharp in either sense is 'dull'.

Moreover, see if one sense of a term has a contrary, while another
has absolutely none; e.g. the pleasure of drinking has a contrary
in the pain of thirst, whereas the pleasure of seeing that the diagonal
is incommensurate with the side has none, so that 'pleasure' is used
in more than one sense. To 'love' also, used of the frame of mind,
has to 'hate' as its contrary, while as used of the physical activity
(kissing) it has none: clearly, therefore, to 'love' is an ambiguous
term. Further, see in regard to their intermediates, if some meanings
and their contraries have an intermediate, others have none, or if
both have one but not the same one, e.g. 'clear' and 'obscure' in
the case of colours have 'grey' as an intermediate, whereas in the
case of sound they have none, or, if they have, it is 'harsh', as
some people say that a harsh sound is intermediate. 'Clear', then,
is an ambiguous term, and likewise also 'obscure'. See, moreover,
if some of them have more than one intermediate, while others have
but one, as is the case with 'clear' and 'obscure', for in the case
of colours there are numbers of intermediates, whereas in regard to
sound there is but one, viz. 'harsh'. 

Again, in the case of the contradictory opposite, look and see if
it bears more than one meaning. For if this bears more than one meaning,
then the opposite of it also will be used in more than one meaning;
e.g. 'to fail to see' a phrase with more than one meaning, viz. (1)
to fail to possess the power of sight, (2) to fail to put that power
to active use. But if this has more than one meaning, it follows necessarily
that 'to see' also has more than one meaning: for there will be an
opposite to each sense of 'to fail to see'; e.g. the opposite of 'not
to possess the power of sight' is to possess it, while of 'not to
put the power of sight to active use', the opposite is to put it to
active use. 

Moreover, examine the case of terms that denote the privation or presence
of a certain state: for if the one term bears more than one meaning,
then so will the remaining term: e.g. if 'to have sense' be used with
more than one meaning, as applied to the soul and to the body, then
'to be wanting in sense' too will be used with more than one meaning,
as applied to the soul and to the body. That the opposition between
the terms now in question depends upon the privation or presence of
a certain state is clear, since animals naturally possess each kind
of 'sense', both as applied to the soul and as applied to the body.

Moreover, examine the inflected forms. For if 'justly' has more than
one meaning, then 'just', also, will be used with more than one meaning;
for there will be a meaning of 'just' to each of the meanings of 'justly';
e.g. if the word 'justly' be used of judging according to one's own
opinion, and also of judging as one ought, then 'just' also will be
used in like manner. In the same way also, if 'healthy' has more than
one meaning, then 'healthily' also will be used with more than one
meaning: e.g. if 'healthy' describes both what produces health and
what preserves health and what betokens health, then 'healthily' also
will be used to mean 'in such a way as to produce' or 'preserve' or
'betoken' health. Likewise also in other cases, whenever the original
term bears more than one meaning, the inflexion also that is formed
from it will be used with more than one meaning, and vice versa.

Look also at the classes of the predicates signified by the term,
and see if they are the same in all cases. For if they are not the
same, then clearly the term is ambiguous: e.g. 'good' in the case
of food means 'productive of pleasure', and in the case of medicine
'productive of health', whereas as applied to the soul it means to
be of a certain quality, e.g. temperate or courageous or just: and
likewise also, as applied to 'man'. Sometimes it signifies what happens
at a certain time, as (e.g.) the good that happens at the right time:
for what happens at the right time is called good. Often it signifies
what is of certain quantity, e.g. as applied to the proper amount:
for the proper amount too is called good. So then the term 'good'
is ambiguous. In the same way also 'clear', as applied to a body,
signifies a colour, but in regard to a note it denotes what is 'easy
to hear'. 'Sharp', too, is in a closely similar case: for the same
term does not bear the same meaning in all its applications: for a
sharp note is a swift note, as the mathematical theorists of harmony
tell us, whereas a sharp (acute) angle is one that is less than a
right angle, while a sharp dagger is one containing a sharp angle
(point). 

Look also at the genera of the objects denoted by the same term, and
see if they are different without being subaltern, as (e.g.) 'donkey',
which denotes both the animal and the engine. For the definition of
them that corresponds to the name is different: for the one will be
declared to be an animal of a certain kind, and the other to be an
engine of a certain kind. If, however, the genera be subaltern, there
is no necessity for the definitions to be different. Thus (e.g.) 'animal'
is the genus of 'raven', and so is 'bird'. Whenever therefore we say
that the raven is a bird, we also say that it is a certain kind of
animal, so that both the genera are predicated of it. Likewise also
whenever we call the raven a 'flying biped animal', we declare it
to be a bird: in this way, then, as well, both the genera are predicated
of raven, and also their definition. But in the case of genera that
are not subaltern this does not happen, for whenever we call a thing
an 'engine', we do not call it an animal, nor vice versa.

Look also and see not only if the genera of the term before you are
different without being subaltern, but also in the case of its contrary:
for if its contrary bears several senses, clearly the term before
you does so as well. 

It is useful also to look at the definition that arises from the use
of the term in combination, e.g. of a 'clear (lit. white) body' of
a 'clear note'. For then if what is peculiar in each case be abstracted,
the same expression ought to remain over. This does not happen in
the case of ambiguous terms, e.g. in the cases just mentioned. For
the former will be body possessing such and such a colour', while
the latter will be 'a note easy to hear'. Abstract, then, 'a body
'and' a note', and the remainder in each case is not the same. It
should, however, have been had the meaning of 'clear' in each case
been synonymous. 

Often in the actual definitions as well ambiguity creeps in unawares,
and for this reason the definitions also should be examined. If (e.g.)
any one describes what betokens and what produces health as 'related
commensurably to health', we must not desist but go on to examine
in what sense he has used the term 'commensurably' in each case, e.g.
if in the latter case it means that 'it is of the right amount to
produce health', whereas in the for it means that 'it is such as to
betoken what kind of state prevails'. 

Moreover, see if the terms cannot be compared as 'more or less' or
as 'in like manner', as is the case (e.g.) with a 'clear' (lit. white)
sound and a 'clear' garment, and a 'sharp' flavour and a 'sharp' note.
For neither are these things said to be clear or sharp 'in a like
degree', nor yet is the one said to be clearer or sharper than the
other. 'Clear', then, and 'sharp' are ambiguous. For synonyms are
always comparable; for they will always be used either in like manner,
or else in a greater degree in one case. 

Now since of genera that are different without being subaltern the
differentiae also are different in kind, e.g. those of 'animal' and
'knowledge' (for the differentiae of these are different), look and
see if the meanings comprised under the same term are differentiae
of genera that are different without being subaltern, as e.g. 'sharp'
is of a 'note' and a 'solid'. For being 'sharp' differentiates note
from note, and likewise also one solid from another. 'Sharp', then,
is an ambiguous term: for it forms differentiae of genera that are
different without being subaltern. 

Again, see if the actual meanings included under the same term themselves
have different differentiae, e.g. 'colour' in bodies and 'colour'
in tunes: for the differentiae of 'colour' in bodies are 'sight-piercing'
and 'sight compressing', whereas 'colour' in melodies has not the
same differentiae. Colour, then, is an ambiguous term; for things
that are the same have the same differentiae. 

Moreover, since the species is never the differentia of anything,
look and see if one of the meanings included under the same term be
a species and another a differentia, as (e.g.) clear' (lit. white)
as applied to a body is a species of colour, whereas in the case of
a note it is a differentia; for one note is differentiated from another
by being 'clear'. 

Part 16

The presence, then, of a number of meanings in a term may be investigated
by these and like means. The differences which things present to each
other should be examined within the same genera, e.g. 'Wherein does
justice differ from courage, and wisdom from temperance?'-for all
these belong to the same genus; and also from one genus to another,
provided they be not very much too far apart, e.g. 'Wherein does sensation
differ from knowledge?: for in the case of genera that are very far
apart, the differences are entirely obvious. 

Part 17

Likeness should be studied, first, in the case of things belonging
to different genera, the formulae being 'A:B = C:D' (e.g. as knowledge
stands to the object of knowledge, so is sensation related to the
object of sensation), and 'As A is in B, so is C in D' (e.g. as sight
is in the eye, so is reason in the soul, and as is a calm in the sea,
so is windlessness in the air). Practice is more especially needed
in regard to terms that are far apart; for in the case of the rest,
we shall be more easily able to see in one glance the points of likeness.
We should also look at things which belong to the same genus, to see
if any identical attribute belongs to them all, e.g. to a man and
a horse and a dog; for in so far as they have any identical attribute,
in so far they are alike. 

Part 18

It is useful to have examined the number of meanings of a term both
for clearness' sake (for a man is more likely to know what it is he
asserts, if it bas been made clear to him how many meanings it may
have), and also with a view to ensuring that our reasonings shall
be in accordance with the actual facts and not addressed merely to
the term used. For as long as it is not clear in how many senses a
term is used, it is possible that the answerer and the questioner
are not directing their minds upon the same thing: whereas when once
it has been made clear how many meanings there are, and also upon
which of them the former directs his mind when he makes his assertion,
the questioner would then look ridiculous if he failed to address
his argument to this. It helps us also both to avoid being misled
and to mislead by false reasoning: for if we know the number of meanings
of a term, we shall certainly never be misled by false reasoning,
but shall know if the questioner fails to address his argument to
the same point; and when we ourselves put the questions we shall be
able to mislead him, if our answerer happens not to know the number
of meanings of our terms. This, however, is not possible in all cases,
but only when of the many senses some are true and others are false.
This manner of argument, however, does not belong properly to dialectic;
dialecticians should therefore by all means beware of this kind of
verbal discussion, unless any one is absolutely unable to discuss
the subject before him in any other way. 

The discovery of the differences of things helps us both in reasonings
about sameness and difference, and also in recognizing what any particular
thing is. That it helps us in reasoning about sameness and difference
is clear: for when we have discovered a difference of any kind whatever
between the objects before us, we shall already have shown that they
are not the same: while it helps us in recognizing what a thing is,
because we usually distinguish the expression that is proper to the
essence of each particular thing by means of the differentiae that
are proper to it. 

The examination of likeness is useful with a view both to inductive
arguments and to hypothetical reasonings, and also with a view to
the rendering of definitions. It is useful for inductive arguments,
because it is by means of an induction of individuals in cases that
are alike that we claim to bring the universal in evidence: for it
is not easy to do this if we do not know the points of likeness. It
is useful for hypothetical reasonings because it is a general opinion
that among similars what is true of one is true also of the rest.
If, then, with regard to any of them we are well supplied with matter
for a discussion, we shall secure a preliminary admission that however
it is in these cases, so it is also in the case before us: then when
we have shown the former we shall have shown, on the strength of the
hypothesis, the matter before us as well: for we have first made the
hypothesis that however it is in these cases, so it is also in the
case before us, and have then proved the point as regards these cases.
It is useful for the rendering of definitions because, if we are able
to see in one glance what is the same in each individual case of it,
we shall be at no loss into what genus we ought to put the object
before us when we define it: for of the common predicates that which
is most definitely in the category of essence is likely to be the
genus. Likewise, also, in the case of objects widely divergent, the
examination of likeness is useful for purposes of definition, e.g.
the sameness of a calm at sea, and windlessness in the air (each being
a form of rest), and of a point on a line and the unit in number-each
being a starting point. If, then, we render as the genus what is common
to all the cases, we shall get the credit of defining not inappropriately.
Definition-mongers too nearly always render them in this way: they
declare the unit to be the startingpoint of number, and the point
the startingpoint of a line. It is clear, then, that they place them
in that which is common to both as their genus. 

The means, then, whereby reasonings are effected, are these: the commonplace
rules, for the observance of which the aforesaid means are useful,
are as follows. 

 

BOOK II

Part 1 

Of problems some are universal, others particular. Universal problems
are such as 'Every pleasure is good' and 'No pleasure is good'; particular
problems are such as 'Some pleasure is good' and 'Some pleasure is
not good'. The methods of establishing and overthrowing a view universally
are common to both kinds of problems; for when we have shown that
a predicate belongs in every case, we shall also have shown that it
belongs in some cases. Likewise, also, if we show that it does not
belong in any case, we shall also have shown that it does not belong
in every case. First, then, we must speak of the methods of overthrowing
a view universally, because such are common to both universal and
particular problems, and because people more usually introduce theses
asserting a predicate than denying it, while those who argue with
them overthrow it. The conversion of an appropriate name which is
drawn from the element 'accident' is an extremely precarious thing;
for in the case of accidents and in no other it is possible for something
to be true conditionally and not universally. Names drawn from the
elements 'definition' and 'property' and 'genus' are bound to be convertible;
e.g. if 'to be an animal that walks on two feet is an attribute of
S', then it will be true by conversion to say that 'S is an animal
that walks on two feet'. Likewise, also, if drawn from the genus;
for if 'to be an animal is an attribute of S', then 'S is an animal'.
The same is true also in the case of a property; for if 'to be capable
of learning grammar is an attribute of S', then 'S will be capable
of learning grammar'. For none of these attributes can possibly belong
or not belong in part; they must either belong or not belong absolutely.
In the case of accidents, on the other hand, there is nothing to prevent
an attribute (e.g. whiteness or justice) belonging in part, so that
it is not enough to show that whiteness or justice is an attribute
of a man in order to show that he is white or just; for it is open
to dispute it and say that he is white or just in part only. Conversion,
then, is not a necessary process in the case of accidents.

We must also define the errors that occur in problems. They are of
two kinds, caused either by false statement or by transgression of
the established diction. For those who make false statements, and
say that an attribute belongs to thing which does not belong to it,
commit error; and those who call objects by the names of other objects
(e.g. calling a planetree a 'man') transgress the established terminology.

Part 2

Now one commonplace rule is to look and see if a man has ascribed
as an accident what belongs in some other way. This mistake is most
commonly made in regard to the genera of things, e.g. if one were
to say that white happens (accidit) to be a colour-for being a colour
does not happen by accident to white, but colour is its genus. The
assertor may of course define it so in so many words, saying (e.g.)
that 'Justice happens (accidit) to be a virtue'; but often even without
such definition it is obvious that he has rendered the genus as an
accident; e.g. suppose that one were to say that whiteness is coloured
or that walking is in motion. For a predicate drawn from the genus
is never ascribed to the species in an inflected form, but always
the genera are predicated of their species literally; for the species
take on both the name and the definition of their genera. A man therefore
who says that white is 'coloured' has not rendered 'coloured' as its
genus, seeing that he has used an inflected form, nor yet as its property
or as its definition: for the definition and property of a thing belong
to it and to nothing else, whereas many things besides white are coloured,
e.g. a log, a stone, a man, and a horse. Clearly then he renders it
as an accident. 

Another rule is to examine all cases where a predicate has been either
asserted or denied universally to belong to something. Look at them
species by species, and not in their infinite multitude: for then
the inquiry will proceed more directly and in fewer steps. You should
look and begin with the most primary groups, and then proceed in order
down to those that are not further divisible: e.g. if a man has said
that the knowledge of opposites is the same, you should look and see
whether it be so of relative opposites and of contraries and of terms
signifying the privation or presence of certain states, and of contradictory
terms. Then, if no clear result be reached so far in these cases,
you should again divide these until you come to those that are not
further divisible, and see (e.g.) whether it be so of just deeds and
unjust, or of the double and the half, or of blindness and sight,
or of being and not-being: for if in any case it be shown that the
knowledge of them is not the same we shall have demolished the problem.
Likewise, also, if the predicate belongs in no case. This rule is
convertible for both destructive and constructive purposes: for if,
when we have suggested a division, the predicate appears to hold in
all or in a large number of cases, we may then claim that the other
should actually assert it universally, or else bring a negative instance
to show in what case it is not so: for if he does neither of these
things, a refusal to assert it will make him look absurd.

Another rule is to make definitions both of an accident and of its
subject, either of both separately or else of one of them, and then
look and see if anything untrue has been assumed as true in the definitions.
Thus (e.g.) to see if it is possible to wrong a god, ask what is 'to
wrong'? For if it be 'to injure deliberately', clearly it is not possible
for a god to be wronged: for it is impossible that God should be injured.
Again, to see if the good man is jealous, ask who is the 'jealous'
man and what is 'jealousy'. For if 'jealousy' is pain at the apparent
success of some well-behaved person, clearly the good man is not jealous:
for then he would be bad. Again, to see if the indignant man is jealous,
ask who each of them is: for then it will be obvious whether the statement
is true or false; e.g. if he is 'jealous' who grieves at the successes
of the good, and he is 'indignant' who grieves at the successes of
the evil, then clearly the indignant man would not be jealous. A man
should substitute definitions also for the terms contained in his
definitions, and not stop until he comes to a familiar term: for often
if the definition be rendered whole, the point at issue is not cleared
up, whereas if for one of the terms used in the definition a definition
be stated, it becomes obvious. 

Moreover, a man should make the problem into a proposition for himself,
and then bring a negative instance against it: for the negative instance
will be a ground of attack upon the assertion. This rule is very nearly
the same as the rule to look into cases where a predicate has been
attributed or denied universally: but it differs in the turn of the
argument. 

Moreover, you should define what kind of things should be called as
most men call them, and what should not. For this is useful both for
establishing and for overthrowing a view: e.g. you should say that
we ought to use our terms to mean the same things as most people mean
by them, but when we ask what kind of things are or are not of such
and such a kind, we should not here go with the multitude: e.g. it
is right to call 'healthy' whatever tends to produce health, as do
most men: but in saying whether the object before us tends to produce
health or not, we should adopt the language no longer of the multitude
but of the doctor. 

Part 3

Moreover, if a term be used in several senses, and it has been laid
down that it is or that it is not an attribute of S, you should show
your case of one of its several senses, if you cannot show it of both.
This rule is to be observed in cases where the difference of meaning
is undetected; for supposing this to be obvious, then the other man
will object that the point which he himself questioned has not been
discussed, but only the other point. This commonplace rule is convertible
for purposes both of establishing and of overthrowing a view. For
if we want to establish a statement, we shall show that in one sense
the attribute belongs, if we cannot show it of both senses: whereas
if we are overthrowing a statement, we shall show that in one sense
the attribute does not belong, if we cannot show it of both senses.
Of course, in overthrowing a statement there is no need to start the
discussion by securing any admission, either when the statement asserts
or when it denies the attribute universally: for if we show that in
any case whatever the attribute does not belong, we shall have demolished
the universal assertion of it, and likewise also if we show that it
belongs in a single case, we shall demolish the universal denial of
it. Whereas in establishing a statement we ought to secure a preliminary
admission that if it belongs in any case whatever, it belongs universally,
supposing this claim to be a plausible one. For it is not enough to
discuss a single instance in order to show that an attribute belongs
universally; e.g. to argue that if the soul of man be immortal, then
every soul is immortal, so that a previous admission must be secured
that if any soul whatever be immortal, then every soul is immortal.
This is not to be done in every case, but only whenever we are not
easily able to quote any single argument applying to all cases in
common, as (e.g.) the geometrician can argue that the triangle has
its angles equal to two right angles. 

If, again, the variety of meanings of a term be obvious, distinguish
how many meanings it has before proceeding either to demolish or to
establish it: e.g. supposing 'the right' to mean 'the expedient' or
'the honourable', you should try either to establish or to demolish
both descriptions of the subject in question; e.g. by showing that
it is honourable and expedient, or that it is neither honourable nor
expedient. Supposing, however, that it is impossible to show both,
you should show the one, adding an indication that it is true in the
one sense and not in the other. The same rule applies also when the
number of senses into which it is divided is more than two.

Again, consider those expressions whose meanings are many, but differ
not by way of ambiguity of a term, but in some other way: e.g. 'The
science of many things is one': here 'many things' may mean the end
and the means to that end, as (e.g.) medicine is the science both
of producing health and of dieting; or they may be both of them ends,
as the science of contraries is said to be the same (for of contraries
the one is no more an end than the other); or again they may be an
essential and an accidental attribute, as (e.g.) the essential fact
that the triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, and the
accidental fact that the equilateral figure has them so: for it is
because of the accident of the equilateral triangle happening to be
a triangle that we know that it has its angles equal to two right
angles. If, then, it is not possible in any sense of the term that
the science of many things should be the same, it clearly is altogether
impossible that it should be so; or, if it is possible in some sense,
then clearly it is possible. Distinguish as many meanings as are required:
e.g. if we want to establish a view, we should bring forward all such
meanings as admit that view and should divide them only into those
meanings which also are required for the establishment of our case:
whereas if we want to overthrow a view, we should bring forward all
that do not admit that view, and leave the rest aside. We must deal
also in these cases as well with any uncertainty about the number
of meanings involved. Further, that one thing is, or is not, 'of'
another should be established by means of the same commonplace rules;
e.g. that a particular science is of a particular thing, treated either
as an end or as a means to its end, or as accidentally connected with
it; or again that it is not 'of' it in any of the aforesaid ways.
The same rule holds true also of desire and all other terms that have
more than one object. For the 'desire of X' may mean the desire of
it as an end (e.g. the desire of health) or as a means to an end (e.g.
the desire of being doctored), or as a thing desired accidentally,
as, in the case of wine, the sweet-toothed person desires it not because
it is wine but because it is sweet. For essentially he desires the
sweet, and only accidentally the wine: for if it be dry, he no longer
desires it. His desire for it is therefore accidental. This rule is
useful in dealing with relative terms: for cases of this kind are
generally cases of relative terms. 

Part 4

Moreover, it is well to alter a term into one more familiar, e.g.
to substitute 'clear' for 'exact' in describing a conception, and
'being fussy' for 'being busy': for when the expression is made more
familiar, the thesis becomes easier to attack. This commonplace rule
also is available for both purposes alike, both for establishing and
for overthrowing a view. 

In order to show that contrary attributes belong to the same thing,
look at its genus; e.g. if we want to show that rightness and wrongness
are possible in regard to perception, and to perceive is to judge,
while it is possible to judge rightly or wrongly, then in regard to
perception as well rightness and wrongness must be possible. In the
present instance the proof proceeds from the genus and relates to
the species: for 'to judge' is the genus of 'to -perceive'; for the
man who perceives judges in a certain way. But per contra it may proceed
from the species to the genus: for all the attributes that belong
to the species belong to the genus as well; e.g. if there is a bad
and a good knowledge there is also a bad and a good disposition: for
'disposition' is the genus of knowledge. Now the former commonplace
argument is fallacious for purposes of establishing a view, while
the second is true. For there is no necessity that all the attributes
that belong to the genus should belong also to the species; for 'animal'
is flying and quadruped, but not so 'man'. All the attributes, on
the other hand, that belong to the species must of necessity belong
also to the genus; for if 'man' is good, then animal also is good.
On the other hand, for purposes of overthrowing a view, the former
argument is true while the latter is fallacious; for all the attributes
which do not belong to the genus do not belong to the species either;
whereas all those that are wanting to the species are not of necessity
wanting to the genus. 

Since those things of which the genus is predicated must also of necessity
have one of its species predicated of them, and since those things
that are possessed of the genus in question, or are described by terms
derived from that genus, must also of necessity be possessed of one
of its species or be described by terms derived from one of its species
(e.g. if to anything the term 'scientific knowledge' be applied, then
also there will be applied to it the term 'grammatical' or 'musical'
knowledge, or knowledge of one of the other sciences; and if any one
possesses scientific knowledge or is described by a term derived from
'science', then he will also possess grammatical or musical knowledge
or knowledge of one of the other sciences, or will be described by
a term derived from one of them, e.g. as a 'grammarian' or a 'musician')-therefore
if any expression be asserted that is in any way derived from the
genus (e.g. that the soul is in motion), look and see whether it be
possible for the soul to be moved with any of the species of motion;
whether (e.g.) it can grow or be destroyed or come to be, and so forth
with all the other species of motion. For if it be not moved in any
of these ways, clearly it does not move at all. This commonplace rule
is common for both purposes, both for overthrowing and for establishing
a view: for if the soul moves with one of the species of motion, clearly
it does move; while if it does not move with any of the species of
motion, clearly it does not move. 

If you are not well equipped with an argument against the assertion,
look among the definitions, real or apparent, of the thing before
you, and if one is not enough, draw upon several. For it will be easier
to attack people when committed to a definition: for an attack is
always more easily made on definitions. 

Moreover, look and see in regard to the thing in question, what it
is whose reality conditions the reality of the thing in question,
or what it is whose reality necessarily follows if the thing in question
be real: if you wish to establish a view inquire what there is on
whose reality the reality of the thing in question will follow (for
if the former be shown to be real, then the thing in question will
also have been shown to be real); while if you want to overthrow a
view, ask what it is that is real if the thing in question be real,
for if we show that what follows from the thing in question is unreal,
we shall have demolished the thing in question. 

Moreover, look at the time involved, to see if there be any discrepancy
anywhere: e.g. suppose a man to have stated that what is being nourished
of necessity grows: for animals are always of necessity being nourished,
but they do not always grow. Likewise, also, if he has said that knowing
is remembering: for the one is concerned with past time, whereas the
other has to do also with the present and the future. For we are said
to know things present and future (e.g. that there will be an eclipse),
whereas it is impossible to remember anything save what is in the
past. 

Part 5

Moreover, there is the sophistic turn of argument, whereby we draw
our opponent into the kind of statement against which we shall be
well supplied with lines of argument. This process is sometimes a
real necessity, sometimes an apparent necessity, sometimes neither
an apparent nor a real necessity. It is really necessary whenever
the answerer has denied any view that would be useful in attacking
the thesis, and the questioner thereupon addresses his arguments to
the support of this view, and when moreover the view in question happens
to be one of a kind on which he has a good stock of lines of argument.
Likewise, also, it is really necessary whenever he (the questioner)
first, by an induction made by means of the view laid down, arrives
at a certain statement and then tries to demolish that statement:
for when once this has been demolished, the view originally laid down
is demolished as well. It is an apparent necessity, when the point
to which the discussion comes to be directed appears to be useful,
and relevant to the thesis, without being really so; whether it be
that the man who is standing up to the argument has refused to concede
something, or whether he (the questioner) has first reached it by
a plausible induction based upon the thesis and then tries to demolish
it. The remaining case is when the point to which the discussion comes
to be directed is neither really nor apparently necessary, and it
is the answerer's luck to be confuted on a mere side issue You should
beware of the last of the aforesaid methods; for it appears to be
wholly disconnected from, and foreign to, the art of dialectic. For
this reason, moreover, the answerer should not lose his temper, but
assent to those statements that are of no use in attacking the thesis,
adding an indication whenever he assents although he does not agree
with the view. For, as a rule, it increases the confusion of questioners
if, after all propositions of this kind have been granted them, they
can then draw no conclusion. 

Moreover, any one who has made any statement whatever has in a certain
sense made several statements, inasmuch as each statement has a number
of necessary consequences: e.g. the man who said 'X is a man' has
also said that it is an animal and that it is animate and a biped
and capable of acquiring reason and knowledge, so that by the demolition
of any single one of these consequences, of whatever kind, the original
statement is demolished as well. But you should beware here too of
making a change to a more difficult subject: for sometimes the consequence,
and sometimes the original thesis, is the easier to demolish.

Part 6

In regard to subjects which must have one and one only of two predicates,
as (e.g.) a man must have either a disease or health, supposing we
are well supplied as regards the one for arguing its presence or absence,
we shall be well equipped as regards the remaining one as well. This
rule is convertible for both purposes: for when we have shown that
the one attribute belongs, we shall have shown that the remaining
one does not belong; while if we show that the one does not belong,
we shall have shown that the remaining one does belong. Clearly then
the rule is useful for both purposes. 

Moreover, you may devise a line of attack by reinterpreting a term
in its literal meaning, with the implication that it is most fitting
so to take it rather than in its established meaning: e.g. the expression
'strong at heart' will suggest not the courageous man, according to
the use now established, but the man the state of whose heart is strong;
just as also the expression 'of a good hope' may be taken to mean
the man who hopes for good things. Likewise also 'well-starred' may
be taken to mean the man whose star is good, as Xenocrates says 'well-starred
is he who has a noble soul'.' For a man's star is his soul.

Some things occur of necessity, others usually, others however it
may chance; if therefore a necessary event has been asserted to occur
usually, or if a usual event (or, failing such an event itself, its
contrary) has been stated to occur of necessity, it always gives an
opportunity for attack. For if a necessary event has been asserted
to occur usually, clearly the speaker has denied an attribute to be
universal which is universal, and so has made a mistake: and so he
has if he has declared the usual attribute to be necessary: for then
he declares it to belong universally when it does not so belong. Likewise
also if he has declared the contrary of what is usual to be necessary.
For the contrary of a usual attribute is always a comparatively rare
attribute: e.g. if men are usually bad, they are comparatively seldom
good, so that his mistake is even worse if he has declared them to
be good of necessity. The same is true also if he has declared a mere
matter of chance to happen of necessity or usually; for a chance event
happens neither of necessity nor usually. If the thing happens usually,
then even supposing his statement does not distinguish whether he
meant that it happens usually or that it happens necessarily, it is
open to you to discuss it on the assumption that he meant that it
happens necessarily: e.g. if he has stated without any distinction
that disinherited persons are bad, you may assume in discussing it
that he means that they are so necessarily. 

Moreover, look and see also if he has stated a thing to be an accident
of itself, taking it to be a different thing because it has a different
name, as Prodicus used to divide pleasures into joy and delight and
good cheer: for all these are names of the same thing, to wit, Pleasure.
If then any one says that joyfulness is an accidental attribute of
cheerfulness, he would be declaring it to be an accidental attribute
of itself. 

Part 7

Inasmuch as contraries can be conjoined with each other in six ways,
and four of these conjunctions constitute a contrariety, we must grasp
the subject of contraries, in order that it may help us both in demolishing
and in establishing a view. Well then, that the modes of conjunction
are six is clear: for either (1) each of the contrary verbs will be
conjoined to each of the contrary objects; and this gives two modes:
e.g. to do good to friends and to do evil to enemies, or per contra
to do evil to friends and to do good to enemies. Or else (2) both
verbs may be attached to one object; and this too gives two modes,
e.g. to do good to friends and to do evil to friends, or to do good
to enemies and to do evil to enemies. Or (3) a single verb may be
attached to both objects: and this also gives two modes; e.g. to do
good to friends and to do good to enemies, or to do evil to friends
and evil to enemies. 

The first two then of the aforesaid conjunctions do not constitute
any contrariety; for the doing of good to friends is not contrary
to the doing of evil to enemies: for both courses are desirable and
belong to the same disposition. Nor is the doing of evil to friends
contrary to the doing of good to enemies: for both of these are objectionable
and belong to the same disposition: and one objectionable thing is
not generally thought to be the contrary of another, unless the one
be an expression denoting an excess, and the other an expression denoting
a defect: for an excess is generally thought to belong to the class
of objectionable things, and likewise also a defect. But the other
four all constitute a contrariety. For to do good to friends is contrary
to the doing of evil to friends: for it proceeds from the contrary
disposition, and the one is desirable, and the other objectionable.
The case is the same also in regard to the other conjunctions: for
in each combination the one course is desirable, and the other objectionable,
and the one belongs to a reasonable disposition and the other to a
bad. Clearly, then, from what has been said, the same course has more
than one contrary. For the doing of good to friends has as its contrary
both the doing of good to enemies and the doing of evil to friends.
Likewise, if we examine them in the same way, we shall find that the
contraries of each of the others also are two in number. Select therefore
whichever of the two contraries is useful in attacking the thesis.

Moreover, if the accident of a thing have a contrary, see whether
it belongs to the subject to which the accident in question has been
declared to belong: for if the latter belongs the former could not
belong; for it is impossible that contrary predicates should belong
at the same time to the same thing. 

Or again, look and see if anything has been said about something,
of such a kind that if it be true, contrary predicates must necessarily
belong to the thing: e.g. if he has said that the 'Ideas' exist in
us. For then the result will be that they are both in motion and at
rest, and moreover that they are objects both of sensation and of
thought. For according to the views of those who posit the existence
of Ideas, those Ideas are at rest and are objects of thought; while
if they exist in us, it is impossible that they should be unmoved:
for when we move, it follows necessarily that all that is in us moves
with us as well. Clearly also they are objects of sensation, if they
exist in us: for it is through the sensation of sight that we recognize
the Form present in each individual. 

Again, if there be posited an accident which has a contrary, look
and see if that which admits of the accident will admit of its contrary
as well: for the same thing admits of contraries. Thus (e.g.) if he
has asserted that hatred follows anger, hatred would in that case
be in the 'spirited faculty': for that is where anger is. You should
therefore look and see if its contrary, to wit, friendship, be also
in the 'spirited faculty': for if not-if friendship is in the faculty
of desire-then hatred could not follow anger. Likewise also if he
has asserted that the faculty of desire is ignorant. For if it were
capable of ignorance, it would be capable of knowledge as well: and
this is not generally held-I mean that the faculty of desire is capable
of knowledge. For purposes, then, of overthrowing a view, as has been
said, this rule should be observed: but for purposes of establishing
one, though the rule will not help you to assert that the accident
actually belongs, it will help you to assert that it may possibly
belong. For having shown that the thing in question will not admit
of the contrary of the accident asserted, we shall have shown that
the accident neither belongs nor can possibly belong; while on the
other hand, if we show that the contrary belongs, or that the thing
is capable of the contrary, we shall not indeed as yet have shown
that the accident asserted does belong as well; our proof will merely
have gone to this point, that it is possible for it to belong.

Part 8

Seeing that the modes of opposition are four in number, you should
look for arguments among the contradictories of your terms, converting
the order of their sequence, both when demolishing and when establishing
a view, and you should secure them by means of induction-such arguments
(e.g.) as that man be an animal, what is not an animal is not a man':
and likewise also in other instances of contradictories. For in those
cases the sequence is converse: for 'animal' follows upon 'man but
'not-animal' does not follow upon 'not-man', but conversely 'not-man'
upon 'not-animal'. In all cases, therefore, a postulate of this sort
should be made, (e.g.) that 'If the honourable is pleasant, what is
not pleasant is not honourable, while if the latter be untrue, so
is the former'. Likewise, also, 'If what is not pleasant be not honourable,
then what is honourable is pleasant'. Clearly, then, the conversion
of the sequence formed by contradiction of the terms of the thesis
is a method convertible for both purposes. 

Then look also at the case of the contraries of S and P in the thesis,
and see if the contrary of the one follows upon the contrary of the
other, either directly or conversely, both when you are demolishing
and when you are establishing a view: secure arguments of this kind
as well by means of induction, so far as may be required. Now the
sequence is direct in a case such as that of courage and cowardice:
for upon the one of them virtue follows, and vice upon the other;
and upon the one it follows that it is desirable, while upon the other
it follows that it is objectionable. The sequence, therefore, in the
latter case also is direct; for the desirable is the contrary of the
objectionable. Likewise also in other cases. The sequence is, on the
other hand, converse in such a case as this: Health follows upon vigour,
but disease does not follow upon debility; rather debility follows
upon disease. In this case, then, clearly the sequence is converse.
Converse sequence is, however, rare in the case of contraries; usually
the sequence is direct. If, therefore, the contrary of the one term
does not follow upon the contrary of the other either directly or
conversely, clearly neither does the one term follow upon the other
in the statement made: whereas if the one followed the other in the
case of the contraries, it must of necessity do so as well in the
original statement. 

You should look also into cases of the privation or presence of a
state in like manner to the case of contraries. Only, in the case
of such privations the converse sequence does not occur: the sequence
is always bound to be direct: e.g. as sensation follows sight, while
absence of sensation follows blindness. For the opposition of sensation
to absence of sensation is an opposition of the presence to the privation
of a state: for the one of them is a state, and the other the privation
of it. 

The case of relative terms should also be studied in like manner to
that of a state and its privation: for the sequence of these as well
is direct; e.g. if 3/1 is a multiple, then 1/3 is a fraction: for
3/1 is relative to 1/3, and so is a multiple to a fraction. Again,
if knowledge be a conceiving, then also the object of knowledge is
an object of conception; and if sight be a sensation, then also the
object of sight is an object of sensation. An objection may be made
that there is no necessity for the sequence to take place, in the
case of relative terms, in the way described: for the object of sensation
is an object of knowledge, whereas sensation is not knowledge. The
objection is, however, not generally received as really true; for
many people deny that there is knowledge of objects of sensation.
Moreover, the principle stated is just as useful for the contrary
purpose, e.g. to show that the object of sensation is not an object
of knowledge, on the ground that neither is sensation knowledge.

Part 9

Again look at the case of the co-ordinates and inflected forms of
the terms in the thesis, both in demolishing and in establishing it.
By co-ordinates' are meant terms such as the following: 'Just deeds'
and the 'just man' are coordinates of 'justice', and 'courageous deeds'
and the 'courageous man' are co-ordinates of courage. Likewise also
things that tend to produce and to preserve anything are called co-ordinates
of that which they tend to produce and to preserve, as e.g. 'healthy
habits' are co-ordinates of 'health' and a 'vigorous constitutional'
of a 'vigorous constitution' and so forth also in other cases. 'Co-ordinate',
then, usually describes cases such as these, whereas 'inflected forms'
are such as the following: 'justly', 'courageously', 'healthily',
and such as are formed in this way. It is usually held that words
when used in their inflected forms as well are co-ordinates, as (e.g.)
'justly' in relation to justice, and 'courageously' to courage; and
then 'co-ordinate' describes all the members of the same kindred series,
e.g. 'justice', 'just', of a man or an act, 'justly'. Clearly, then,
when any one member, whatever its kind, of the same kindred series
is shown to be good or praiseworthy, then all the rest as well come
to be shown to be so: e.g. if 'justice' be something praiseworthy,
then so will 'just', of a man or thing, and 'justly' connote something
praiseworthy. Then 'justly' will be rendered also 'praiseworthily',
derived will by the same inflexion from 'the praiseworthy' whereby
'justly' is derived from 'justice'. 

Look not only in the case of the subject mentioned, but also in the
case of its contrary, for the contrary predicate: e.g. argue that
good is not necessarily pleasant; for neither is evil painful: or
that, if the latter be the case, so is the former. Also, if justice
be knowledge, then injustice is ignorance: and if 'justly' means 'knowingly'
and 'skilfully', then 'unjustly' means 'ignorantly' and 'unskilfully':
whereas if the latter be not true, neither is the former, as in the
instance given just now: for 'unjustly' is more likely to seem equivalent
to 'skilfully' than to 'unskilfully'. This commonplace rule has been
stated before in dealing with the sequence of contraries; for all
we are claiming now is that the contrary of P shall follow the contrary
of S. 

Moreover, look at the modes of generation and destruction of a thing,
and at the things which tend to produce or to destroy it, both in
demolishing and in establishing a view. For those things whose modes
of generation rank among good things, are themselves also good; and
if they themselves be good, so also are their modes of generation.
If, on the other hand, their modes of generation be evil, then they
themselves also are evil. In regard to modes of destruction the converse
is true: for if the modes of destruction rank as good things, then
they themselves rank as evil things; whereas if the modes of destruction
count as evil, they themselves count as good. The same argument applies
also to things tending to produce and destroy: for things whose productive
causes are good, themselves also rank as good; whereas if causes destructive
of them are good, they themselves rank as evil. 

Part 10

Again, look at things which are like the subject in question, and
see if they are in like case; e.g. if one branch of knowledge has
more than one object, so also will one opinion; and if to possess
sight be to see, then also to possess hearing will be to hear. Likewise
also in the case of other things, both those which are and those which
are generally held to be like. The rule in question is useful for
both purposes; for if it be as stated in the case of some one like
thing, it is so with the other like things as well, whereas if it
be not so in the case of some one of them, neither is it so in the
case of the others. Look and see also whether the cases are alike
as regards a single thing and a number of things: for sometimes there
is a discrepancy. Thus, if to 'know' a thing be to 'think of' it,
then also to 'know many things' is to 'be thinking of many things';
whereas this is not true; for it is possible to know many things but
not to be thinking of them. If, then, the latter proposition be not
true, neither was the former that dealt with a single thing, viz.
that to 'know' a thing is to 'think of' it. 

Moreover, argue from greater and less degrees. In regard to greater
degrees there are four commonplace rules. One is: See whether a greater
degree of the predicate follows a greater degree of the subject: e.g.
if pleasure be good, see whether also a greater pleasure be a greater
good: and if to do a wrong be evil, see whether also to do a greater
wrong is a greater evil. Now this rule is of use for both purposes:
for if an increase of the accident follows an increase of the subject,
as we have said, clearly the accident belongs; while if it does not
follow, the accident does not belong. You should establish this by
induction. Another rule is: If one predicate be attributed to two
subjects; then supposing it does not belong to the subject to which
it is the more likely to belong, neither does it belong where it is
less likely to belong; while if it does belong where it is less likely
to belong, then it belongs as well where it is more likely. Again:
If two predicates be attributed to one subject, then if the one which
is more generally thought to belong does not belong, neither does
the one that is less generally thought to belong; or, if the one that
is less generally thought to belong does belong, so also does the
other. Moreover: If two predicates be attributed to two subjects,
then if the one which is more usually thought to belong to the one
subject does not belong, neither does the remaining predicate belong
to the remaining subject; or, if the one which is less usually thought
to belong to the one subject does belong, so too does the remaining
predicate to the remaining subject. 

Moreover, you can argue from the fact that an attribute belongs, or
is generally supposed to belong, in a like degree, in three ways,
viz. those described in the last three rules given in regard to a
greater degree.' For supposing that one predicate belongs, or is supposed
to belong, to two subjects in a like degree, then if it does not belong
to the one, neither does it belong to the other; while if it belongs
to the one, it belongs to the remaining one as well. Or, supposing
two predicates to belong in a like degree to the same subject, then,
if the one does not belong, neither does the remaining one; while
if the one does belong, the remaining one belongs as well. The case
is the same also if two predicates belong in a like degree to two
subjects; for if the one predicate does not belong to the one subject,
neither does the remaining predicate belong to the remaining subject,
while if the one predicate does belong to the one subject, the remaining
predicate belongs to the remaining subject as well. 

Part 11

You can argue, then, from greater or less or like degrees of truth
in the aforesaid number of ways. Moreover, you should argue from the
addition of one thing to another. If the addition of one thing to
another makes that other good or white, whereas formerly it was not
white or good, then the thing added will be white or good-it will
possess the character it imparts to the whole as well. Moreover, if
an addition of something to a given object intensifies the character
which it had as given, then the thing added will itself as well be
of that character. Likewise, also, in the case of other attributes.
The rule is not applicable in all cases, but only in those in which
the excess described as an 'increased intensity' is found to take
place. The above rule is, however, not convertible for overthrowing
a view. For if the thing added does not make the other good, it is
not thereby made clear whether in itself it may not be good: for the
addition of good to evil does not necessarily make the whole good,
any more than the addition of white to black makes the whole white.

Again, any predicate of which we can speak of greater or less degrees
belongs also absolutely: for greater or less degrees of good or of
white will not be attributed to what is not good or white: for a bad
thing will never be said to have a greater or less degree of goodness
than another, but always of badness. This rule is not convertible,
either, for the purpose of overthrowing a predication: for several
predicates of which we cannot speak of a greater degree belong absolutely:
for the term 'man' is not attributed in greater and less degrees,
but a man is a man for all that. 

You should examine in the same way predicates attributed in a given
respect, and at a given time and place: for if the predicate be possible
in some respect, it is possible also absolutely. Likewise, also, is
what is predicated at a given time or place: for what is absolutely
impossible is not possible either in any respect or at any place or
time. An objection may be raised that in a given respect people may
be good by nature, e.g. they may be generous or temperately inclined,
while absolutely they are not good by nature, because no one is prudent
by nature. Likewise, also, it is possible for a destructible thing
to escape destruction at a given time, whereas it is not possible
for it to escape absolutely. In the same way also it is a good thing
at certain places to follow see and such a diet, e.g. in infected
areas, though it is not a good thing absolutely. Moreover, in certain
places it is possible to live singly and alone, but absolutely it
is not possible to exist singly and alone. In the same way also it
is in certain places honourable to sacrifice one's father, e.g. among
the Triballi, whereas, absolutely, it is not honourable. Or possibly
this may indicate a relativity not to places but to persons: for it
is all the same wherever they may be: for everywhere it will be held
honourable among the Triballi themselves, just because they are Triballi.
Again, at certain times it is a good thing to take medicines, e.g.
when one is ill, but it is not so absolutely. Or possibly this again
may indicate a relativity not to a certain time, but to a certain
state of health: for it is all the same whenever it occurs, if only
one be in that state. A thing is 'absolutely' so which without any
addition you are prepared to say is honourable or the contrary. Thus
(e.g.) you will deny that to sacrifice one's father is honourable:
it is honourable only to certain persons: it is not therefore honourable
absolutely. On the other hand, to honour the gods you will declare
to be honourable without adding anything, because that is honourable
absolutely. So that whatever without any addition is generally accounted
to be honourable or dishonourable or anything else of that kind, will
be said to be so 'absolutely'. 

 

BOOK III

Part 1 

The question which is the more desirable, or the better, of two or
more things, should be examined upon the following lines: only first
of all it must be clearly laid down that the inquiry we are making
concerns not things that are widely divergent and that exhibit great
differences from one another (for nobody raises any doubt whether
happiness or wealth is more desirable), but things that are nearly
related and about which we commonly discuss for which of the two we
ought rather to vote, because we do not see any advantage on either
side as compared with the other. Clearly, in such cases if we can
show a single advantage, or more than one, our judgement will record
our assent that whichever side happens to have the advantage is the
more desirable. 

First, then, that which is more lasting or secure is more desirable
than that which is less so: and so is that which is more likely to
be chosen by the prudent or by the good man or by the right law, or
by men who are good in any particular line, when they make their choice
as such, or by the experts in regard to any particular class of things;
i.e. either whatever most of them or what all of them would choose;
e.g. in medicine or in carpentry those things are more desirable which
most, or all, doctors would choose; or, in general, whatever most
men or all men or all things would choose, e.g. the good: for everything
aims at the good. You should direct the argument you intend to employ
to whatever purpose you require. Of what is 'better' or 'more desirable'
the absolute standard is the verdict of the better science, though
relatively to a given individual the standard may be his own particular
science. 

In the second place, that which is known as 'an x' is more desirable
than that which does not come within the genus 'x'-e.g. justice than
a just man; for the former falls within the genus 'good', whereas
the other does not, and the former is called 'a good', whereas the
latter is not: for nothing which does not happen to belong to the
genus in question is called by the generic name; e.g. a 'white man'
is not 'a colour'. Likewise also in other cases. 

Also, that which is desired for itself is more desirable than that
which is desired for something else; e.g. health is more desirable
than gymnastics: for the former is desired for itself, the latter
for something else. Also, that which is desirable in itself is more
desirable than what is desirable per accidens; e.g. justice in our
friends than justice in our enemies: for the former is desirable in
itself, the latter per accidens: for we desire that our enemies should
be just per accidens, in order that they may do us no harm. This last
principle is the same as the one that precedes it, with, however,
a different turn of expression. For we desire justice in our friends
for itself, even though it will make no difference to us, and even
though they be in India; whereas in our enemies we desire it for something
else, in order that they may do us no harm. 

Also, that which is in itself the cause of good is more desirable
than what is so per accidens, e.g. virtue than luck (for the former
in itself, and the latter per accidens, the cause of good things),
and so in other cases of the same kind. Likewise also in the case
of the contrary; for what is in itself the cause of evil is more objectionable
than what is so per accidens, e.g. vice and chance: for the one is
bad in itself, whereas chance is so per accidens. 

Also, what is good absolutely is more desirable than what is good
for a particular person, e.g. recovery of health than a surgical operation;
for the former is good absolutely, the latter only for a particular
person, viz. the man who needs an operation. So too what is good by
nature is more desirable than the good that is not so by nature, e.g.
justice than the just man; for the one is good by nature, whereas
in the other case the goodness is acquired. Also the attribute is
more desirable which belongs to the better and more honourable subject,
e.g. to a god rather than to a man, and to the soul rather than to
the body. So too the property of the better thing is better than the
property of the worse; e.g. the property of God than the property
of man: for whereas in respect of what is common in both of them they
do not differ at all from each other, in respect of their properties
the one surpasses the other. Also that is better which is inherent
in things better or prior or more honourable: thus (e.g.) health is
better than strength and beauty: for the former is inherent in the
moist and the dry, and the hot and the cold, in fact in all the primary
constituents of an animal, whereas the others are inherent in what
is secondary, strength being a feature of the sinews and bones, while
beauty is generally supposed to consist in a certain symmetry of the
limbs. Also the end is generally supposed to be more desirable than
the means, and of two means, that which lies nearer the end. In general,
too, a means directed towards the end of life is more desirable than
a means to anything else, e.g. that which contributes to happiness
than that which contributes to prudence. Also the competent is more
desirable than the incompetent. Moreover, of two productive agents
that one is more desirable whose end is better; while between a productive
agent and an end we can decide by a proportional sum whenever the
excess of the one end over the other is greater than that of the latter
over its own productive means: e.g. supposing the excess of happiness
over health to be greater than that of health over what produces health,
then what produces happiness is better than health. For what produces
happiness exceeds what produces health just as much as happiness exceeds
health. But health exceeds what produces health by a smaller amount;
ergo, the excess of what produces happiness over what produces health
is greater than that of health over what produces health. Clearly,
therefore, what produces happiness is more desirable than health:
for it exceeds the same standard by a greater amount. Moreover, what
is in itself nobler and more precious and praiseworthy is more desirable
than what is less so, e.g. friendship than wealth, and justice than
strength. For the former belong in themselves to the class of things
precious and praiseworthy, while the latter do so not in themselves
but for something else: for no one prizes wealth for itself but always
for something else, whereas we prize friendship for itself, even though
nothing else is likely to come to us from it. 

Part 2

Moreover, whenever two things are very much like one another, and
we cannot see any superiority in the one over the other of them, we
should look at them from the standpoint of their consequences. For
the one which is followed by the greater good is the more desirable:
or, if the consequences be evil, that is more desirable which is followed
by the less evil. For though both may be desirable, yet there may
possibly be some unpleasant consequence involved to turn the scale.
Our survey from the point of view of consequences lies in two directions,
for there are prior consequences and later consequences: e.g. if a
man learns, it follows that he was ignorant before and knows afterwards.
As a rule, the later consequence is the better to consider. You should
take, therefore, whichever of the consequences suits your purpose.

Moreover, a greater number of good things is more desirable than a
smaller, either absolutely or when the one is included in the other,
viz. the smaller number in the greater. An objection may be raised
suppose in some particular case the one is valued for the sake of
the other; for then the two together are not more desirable than the
one; e.g. recovery of health and health, than health alone, inasmuch
as we desire recovery of health for the sake of health. Also it is
quite possible for what is not good, together with what is, to be
more desirable than a greater number of good things, e.g. the combination
of happiness and something else which is not good may be more desirable
than the combination of justice and courage. Also, the same things
are more valuable if accompanied than if unaccompanied by pleasure,
and likewise when free from pain than when attended with pain.

Also, everything is more desirable at the season when it is of greater
consequence; e.g. freedom from pain in old age more than in youth:
for it is of greater consequence in old age. On the same principle
also, prudence is more desirable in old age; for no man chooses the
young to guide him, because he does not expect them to be prudent.
With courage, the converse is the case, for it is in youth that the
active exercise of courage is more imperatively required. Likewise
also with temperance; for the young are more troubled by their passions
than are their elders. 

Also, that is more desirable which is more useful at every season
or at most seasons, e.g. justice and temperance rather than courage:
for they are always useful, while courage is only useful at times.
Also, that one of two things which if all possess, we do not need
the other thing, is more desirable than that which all may possess
and still we want the other one as well. Take the case of justice
and courage; if everybody were just, there would be no use for courage,
whereas all might be courageous, and still justice would be of use.

Moreover, judge by the destructions and losses and generations and
acquisitions and contraries of things: for things whose destruction
is more objectionable are themselves more desirable. Likewise also
with the losses and contraries of things; for a thing whose loss or
whose contrary is more objectionable is itself more desirable. With
the generations or acquisitions of things the opposite is the case:
for things whose acquisition or generation is more desirable are themselves
also desirable. Another commonplace rule is that what is nearer to
the good is better and more desirable, i.e. what more nearly resembles
the good: thus justice is better than a just man. Also, that which
is more like than another thing to something better than itself, as
e.g. some say that Ajax was a better man than Odysseus because he
was more like Achilles. An objection may be raised to this that it
is not true: for it is quite possible that Ajax did not resemble Achilles
more nearly than Odysseus in the points which made Achilles the best
of them, and that Odysseus was a good man, though unlike Achilles.
Look also to see whether the resemblance be that of a caricature,
like the resemblance of a monkey to a man, whereas a horse bears none:
for the monkey is not the more handsome creature, despite its nearer
resemblance to a man. Again, in the case of two things, if one is
more like the better thing while another is more like the worse, then
that is likely to be better which is more like the better. This too,
however, admits of an objection: for quite possibly the one only slightly
resembles the better, while the other strongly resembles the worse,
e.g. supposing the resemblance of Ajax to Achilles to be slight, while
that of Odysseus to Nestor is strong. Also it may be that the one
which is like the better type shows a degrading likeness, whereas
the one which is like the worse type improves upon it: witness the
likeness of a horse to a donkey, and that of a monkey to a man.

Another rule is that the more conspicuous good is more desirable than
the less conspicuous, and the more difficult than the easier: for
we appreciate better the possession of things that cannot be easily
acquired. Also the more personal possession is more desirable than
the more widely shared. Also, that which is more free from connexion
with evil: for what is not attended by any unpleasantness is more
desirable than what is so attended. 

Moreover, if A be without qualification better than B, then also the
best of the members of A is better than the best of the members of
B; e.g. if Man be better than Horse, then also the best man is better
than the best horse. Also, if the best in A be better than the best
in B, then also A is better than B without qualification; e.g. if
the best man be better than the best horse, then also Man is better
than Horse without qualification. 

Moreover, things which our friends can share are more desirable than
those they cannot. Also, things which we like rather to do to our
friend are more desirable than those we like to do to the man in the
street, e.g. just dealing and the doing of good rather than the semblance
of them: for we would rather really do good to our friends than seem
to do so, whereas towards the man in the street the converse is the
case. 

Also, superfluities are better than necessities, and are sometimes
more desirable as well: for the good life is better than mere life,
and good life is a superfluity, whereas mere life itself is a necessity.
Sometimes, though, what is better is not also more desirable: for
there is no necessity that because it is better it should also be
more desirable: at least to be a philosopher is better than to make
money, but it is not more desirable for a man who lacks the necessities
of life. The expression 'superfluity' applies whenever a man possesses
the necessities of life and sets to work to secure as well other noble
acquisitions. Roughly speaking, perhaps, necessities are more desirable,
while superfluities are better. 

Also, what cannot be got from another is more desirable than what
can be got from another as well, as (e.g.) is the case of justice
compared with courage. Also, A is more desirable if A is desirable
without B, but not B without A: power (e.g.) is not desirable without
prudence, but prudence is desirable without power. Also, if of two
things we repudiate the one in order to be thought to possess the
other, then that one is more desirable which we wish to be thought
to possess; thus (e.g.) we repudiate the love of hard work in order
that people may think us geniuses. 

Moreover, that is more desirable in whose absence it is less blameworthy
for people to be vexed; and that is more desirable in whose absence
it is more blameworthy for a man not to be vexed. 

Part 3

Moreover, of things that belong to the same species one which possesses
the peculiar virtue of the species is more desirable than one which
does not. If both possess it, then the one which possesses it in a
greater degree is more desirable. 

Moreover, if one thing makes good whatever it touches, while another
does not, the former is more desirable, just as also what makes things
warm is warmer than what does not. If both do so, then that one is
more desirable which does so in a greater degree, or if it render
good the better and more important object-if (e.g.), the one makes
good the soul, and the other the body. 

Moreover, judge things by their inflexions and uses and actions and
works, and judge these by them: for they go with each other: e.g.
if 'justly' means something more desirable than 'courageously', then
also justice means something more desirable than courage; and if justice
be more desirable than courage, then also 'justly' means something
more desirable than 'courageously'. Similarly also in the other cases.

Moreover, if one thing exceeds while the other falls short of the
same standard of good, the one which exceeds is the more desirable;
or if the one exceeds an even higher standard. Nay more, if there
be two things both preferable to something, the one which is more
highly preferable to it is more desirable than the less highly preferable.
Moreover, when the excess of a thing is more desirable than the excess
of something else, that thing is itself also more desirable than the
other, as (e.g.) friendship than money: for an excess of friendship
is more desirable than an excess of money. So also that of which a
man would rather that it were his by his own doing is more desirable
than what he would rather get by another's doing, e.g. friends than
money. Moreover, judge by means of an addition, and see if the addition
of A to the same thing as B makes the whole more desirable than does
the addition of B. You must, however, beware of adducing a case in
which the common term uses, or in some other way helps the case of,
one of the things added to it, but not the other, as (e.g.) if you
took a saw and a sickle in combination with the art of carpentry:
for in the combination the saw is a more desirable thing, but it is
not a more desirable thing without qualification. Again, a thing is
more desirable if, when added to a lesser good, it makes the whole
greater good. Likewise, also, you should judge by means of subtraction:
for the thing upon whose subtraction the remainder is a lesser good
may be taken to be a greater good, whichever it be whose subtraction
makes the remainder a lesser good. 

Also, if one thing be desirable for itself, and the other for the
look of it, the former is more desirable, as (e.g.) health than beauty.
A thing is defined as being desired for the look of it if, supposing
no one knew of it, you would not care to have it. Also, it is more
desirable both for itself and for the look of it, while the other
thing is desirable on the one ground alone. Also, whichever is the
more precious for itself, is also better and more desirable. A thing
may be taken to be more precious in itself which we choose rather
for itself, without anything else being likely to come of it.

Moreover, you should distinguish in how many senses 'desirable' is
used, and with a view to what ends, e.g. expediency or honour or pleasure.
For what is useful for all or most of them may be taken to be more
desirable than what is not useful in like manner. If the same characters
belong to both things you should look and see which possesses them
more markedly, i.e. which of the two is the more pleasant or more
honourable or more expedient. Again, that is more desirable which
serves the better purpose, e.g. that which serves to promote virtue
more than that which serves to promote pleasure. Likewise also in
the case of objectionable things; for that is more objectionable which
stands more in the way of what is desirable, e.g. disease more than
ugliness: for disease is a greater hindrance both to pleasure and
to being good. 

Moreover, argue by showing that the thing in question is in like measure
objectionable and desirable: for a thing of such a character that
a man might well desire and object to it alike is less desirable than
the other which is desirable only. 

Part 4

Comparisons of things together should therefore be conducted in the
manner prescribed. The same commonplace rules are useful also for
showing that anything is simply desirable or objectionable: for we
have only to subtract the excess of one thing over another. For if
what is more precious be more desirable, then also what is precious
is desirable; and if what is more useful be more desirable, then also
what is useful is desirable. Likewise, also, in the case of other
things which admit of comparisons of that kind. For in some cases
in the very course of comparing the things together we at once assert
also that each of them, or the one of them, is desirable, e.g. whenever
we call the one good 'by nature' and the other 'not by nature': for
dearly what is good by nature is desirable. 

Part 5

The commonplace rules relating to comparative degrees and amounts
ought to be taken in the most general possible form: for when so taken
they are likely to be useful in a larger number of instances. It is
possible to render some of the actual rules given above more universal
by a slight alteration of the expression, e.g. that what by nature
exhibits such and such a quality exhibits that quality in a greater
degree than what exhibits it not by nature. Also, if one thing does,
and another does not, impart such and such a quality to that which
possesses it, or to which it belongs, then whichever does impart it
is of that quality in greater degree than the one which does not impart
it; and if both impart it, then that one exhibits it in a greater
degree which imparts it in a greater degree. 

Moreover, if in any character one thing exceeds and another falls
short of the same standard; also, if the one exceeds something which
exceeds a given standard, while the other does not reach that standard,
then clearly the first-named thing exhibits that character in a greater
degree. Moreover, you should judge by means of addition, and see if
A when added to the same thing as B imparts to the whole such and
such a character in a more marked degree than B, or if, when added
to a thing which exhibits that character in a less degree, it imparts
that character to the whole in a greater degree. Likewise, also, you
may judge by means of subtraction: for a thing upon whose subtraction
the remainder exhibits such and such a character in a less degree,
itself exhibits that character in a greater degree. Also, things exhibit
such and such a character in a greater degree if more free from admixture
with their contraries; e.g. that is whiter which is more free from
admixture with black. Moreover, apart from the rules given above,
that has such and such a character in greater degree which admits
in a greater degree of the definition proper to the given character;
e.g. if the definition of 'white' be 'a colour which pierces the vision',
then that is whiter which is in a greater degree a colour that pierces
the vision. 

Part 6

If the question be put in a particular and not in a universal form,
in the first place the universal constructive or destructive commonplace
rules that have been given may all be brought into use. For in demolishing
or establishing a thing universally we also show it in particular:
for if it be true of all, it is true also of some, and if untrue of
all, it is untrue of some. Especially handy and of general application
are the commonplace rules that are drawn from the opposites and co-ordinates
and inflexions of a thing: for public opinion grants alike the claim
that if all pleasure be good, then also all pain is evil, and the
claim that if some pleasure be good, then also some pain is evil.
Moreover, if some form of sensation be not a capacity, then also some
form of failure of sensation is not a failure of capacity. Also, if
the object of conception is in some cases an object of knowledge,
then also some form of conceiving is knowledge. Again, if what is
unjust be in some cases good, then also what is just is in some cases
evil; and if what happens justly is in some cases evil, then also
what happens unjustly is in some cases good. Also, if what is pleasant
is in some cases objectionable, then pleasure is in some cases an
objectionable thing. On the same principle, also, if what is pleasant
is in some cases beneficial, then pleasure is in some cases a beneficial
thing. The case is the same also as regards the things that destroy,
and the processes of generation and destruction. For if anything that
destroys pleasure or knowledge be in some cases good, then we may
take it that pleasure or knowledge is in some cases an evil thing.
Likewise, also, if the destruction of knowledge be in some cases a
good thing or its production an evil thing, then knowledge will be
in some cases an evil thing; e.g. if for a man to forget his disgraceful
conduct be a good thing, and to remember it be an evil thing, then
the knowledge of his disgraceful conduct may be taken to be an evil
thing. The same holds also in other cases: in all such cases the premiss
and the conclusion are equally likely to be accepted. 

Moreover you should judge by means of greater or smaller or like degrees:
for if some member of another genus exhibit such and such a character
in a more marked degree than your object, while no member of that
genus exhibits that character at all, then you may take it that neither
does the object in question exhibit it; e.g. if some form of knowledge
be good in a greater degree than pleasure, while no form of knowledge
is good, then you may take it that pleasure is not good either. Also,
you should judge by a smaller or like degree in the same way: for
so you will find it possible both to demolish and to establish a view,
except that whereas both are possible by means of like degrees, by
means of a smaller degree it is possible only to establish, not to
overthrow. For if a certain form of capacity be good in a like degree
to knowledge, and a certain form of capacity be good, then so also
is knowledge; while if no form of capacity be good, then neither is
knowledge. If, too, a certain form of capacity be good in a less degree
than knowledge, and a certain form of capacity be good, then so also
is knowledge; but if no form of capacity be good, there is no necessity
that no form of knowledge either should be good. Clearly, then, it
is only possible to establish a view by means of a less degree.

Not only by means of another genus can you overthrow a view, but also
by means of the same, if you take the most marked instance of the
character in question; e.g. if it be maintained that some form of
knowledge is good, then, suppose it to be shown that prudence is not
good, neither will any other kind be good, seeing that not even the
kind upon which there is most general agreement is so. Moreover, you
should go to work by means of an hypothesis; you should claim that
the attribute, if it belongs or does not belong in one case, does
so in a like degree in all, e.g. that if the soul of man be immortal,
so are other souls as well, while if this one be not so, neither are
the others. If, then, it be maintained that in some instance the attribute
belongs, you must show that in some instance it does not belong: for
then it will follow, by reason of the hypothesis, that it does not
belong to any instance at all. If, on the other hand, it be maintained
that it does not belong in some instance, you must show that it does
belong in some instance, for in this way it will follow that it belongs
to all instances. It is clear that the maker of the hypothesis universalizes
the question, whereas it was stated in a particular form: for he claims
that the maker of a particular admission should make a universal admission,
inasmuch as he claims that if the attribute belongs in one instance,
it belongs also in all instances alike. 

If the problem be indefinite, it is possible to overthrow a statement
in only one way; e.g. if a man has asserted that pleasure is good
or is not good, without any further definition. For if he meant that
a particular pleasure is good, you must show universally that no pleasure
is good, if the proposition in question is to be demolished. And likewise,
also, if he meant that some particular pleasure is not good you must
show universally that all pleasure is good: it is impossible to demolish
it in any other way. For if we show that some particular pleasure
is not good or is good, the proposition in question is not yet demolished.
It is clear, then, that it is possible to demolish an indefinite statement
in one way only, whereas it can be established in two ways: for whether
we show universally that all pleasure is good, or whether we show
that a particular pleasure is good, the proposition in question will
have been proved. Likewise, also, supposing we are required to argue
that some particular pleasure is not good, if we show that no pleasure
is good or that a particular pleasure is not good, we shall have produced
an argument in both ways, both universally and in particular, to show
that some particular pleasure is not good. If, on the other hand,
the statement made be definite, it will be possible to demolish it
in two ways; e.g. if it be maintained that it is an attribute of some
particular pleasure to be good, while of some it is not: for whether
it be shown that all pleasure, or that no pleasure, is good, the proposition
in question will have been demolished. If, however, he has stated
that only one single pleasure is good, it is possible to demolish
it in three ways: for by showing that all pleasure, or that no pleasure,
or that more than one pleasure, is good, we shall have demolished
the statement in question. If the statement be made still more definite,
e.g. that prudence alone of the virtues is knowledge, there are four
ways of demolishing it: for if it be shown that all virtue is knowledge,
or that no virtue is so, or that some other virtue (e.g. justice)
is so, or that prudence itself is not knowledge, the proposition in
question will have been demolished. 

It is useful also to take a look at individual instances, in cases
where some attribute has been said to belong or not to belong, as
in the case of universal questions. Moreover, you should take a glance
among genera, dividing them by their species until you come to those
that are not further divisible, as has been said before:' for whether
the attribute is found to belong in all cases or in none, you should,
after adducing several instances, claim that he should either admit
your point universally, or else bring an objection showing in what
case it does not hold. Moreover, in cases where it is possible to
make the accident definite either specifically or numerically, you
should look and see whether perhaps none of them belongs, showing
e.g. that time is not moved, nor yet a movement, by enumerating how
many species there are of movement: for if none of these belong to
time, clearly it does not move, nor yet is a movement. Likewise, also,
you can show that the soul is not a number, by dividing all numbers
into either odd or even: for then, if the soul be neither odd nor
even, clearly it is not a number. 

In regard then to Accident, you should set to work by means like these,
and in this manner. 

 

BOOK IV

Part 1 

Next we must go on to examine questions relating to Genus and Property.
These are elements in the questions that relate to definitions, but
dialecticians seldom address their inquiries to these by themselves.
If, then, a genus be suggested for something that is, first take a
look at all objects which belong to the same genus as the thing mentioned,
and see whether the genus suggested is not predicated of one of them,
as happens in the case of an accident: e.g. if 'good' be laid down
to be the genus of 'pleasure', see whether some particular pleasure
be not good: for, if so, clearly good' is not the genus of pleasure:
for the genus is predicated of all the members of the same species.
Secondly, see whether it be predicated not in the category of essence,
but as an accident, as 'white' is predicated of 'snow', or 'self-moved'
of the soul. For 'snow' is not a kind of 'white', and therefore 'white'
is not the genus of snow, nor is the soul a kind of 'moving object':
its motion is an accident of it, as it often is of an animal to walk
or to be walking. Moreover, 'moving' does not seem to indicate the
essence, but rather a state of doing or of having something done to
it. Likewise, also, 'white': for it indicates not the essence of snow,
but a certain quality of it. So that neither of them is predicated
in the category of 'essence'. 

Especially you should take a look at the definition of Accident, and
see whether it fits the genus mentioned, as (e.g.) is also the case
in the instances just given. For it is possible for a thing to be
and not to be self-moved, and likewise, also, for it to be and not
to be white. So that neither of these attributes is the genus but
an accident, since we were saying that an accident is an attribute
which can belong to a thing and also not belong. 

Moreover, see whether the genus and the species be not found in the
same division, but the one be a substance while the other is a quality,
or the one be a relative while the other is a quality, as (e.g.) 'slow'
and 'swan' are each a substance, while 'white' is not a substance
but a quality, so that 'white' is not the genus either of 'snow' or
of 'swan'. Again, knowledge' is a relative, while 'good' and 'noble'
are each a quality, so that good, or noble, is not the genus of knowledge.
For the genera of relatives ought themselves also to be relatives,
as is the case with 'double': for multiple', which is the genus of
'double', is itself also a relative. To speak generally, the genus
ought to fall under the same division as the species: for if the species
be a substance, so too should be the genus, and if the species be
a quality, so too the genus should be a quality; e.g. if white be
a quality, so too should colour be. Likewise, also, in other cases.

Again, see whether it be necessary or possible for the genus to partake
of the object which has been placed in the genus. 'To partake' is
defined as 'to admit the definition of that which is partaken. Clearly,
therefore, the species partake of the genera, but not the genera of
the species: for the species admits the definition of the genus, whereas
the genus does not admit that of the species. You must look, therefore,
and see whether the genus rendered partakes or can possibly partake
of the species, e.g. if any one were to render anything as genus of
'being' or of 'unity': for then the result will be that the genus
partakes of the species: for of everything that is, 'being' and 'unity'
are predicated, and therefore their definition as well. 

Moreover, see if there be anything of which the species rendered is
true, while the genus is not so, e.g. supposing 'being' or 'object
of knowledge' were stated to be the genus of 'object of opinion'.
For 'object of opinion' will be a predicate of what does not exist;
for many things which do not exist are objects of opinion; whereas
that 'being' or 'object of knowledge' is not predicated of what does
not exist is clear. So that neither 'being' nor 'object of knowledge'
is the genus of 'object of opinion': for of the objects of which the
species is predicated, the genus ought to be predicated as well.

Again, see whether the object placed in the genus be quite unable
to partake of any of its species: for it is impossible that it should
partake of the genus if it do not partake of any of its species, except
it be one of the species reached by the first division: these do partake
of the genus alone. If, therefore, 'Motion' be stated as the genus
of pleasure, you should look and see if pleasure be neither locomotion
nor alteration, nor any of the rest of the given modes of motion:
for clearly you may then take it that it does not partake of any of
the species, and therefore not of the genus either, since what partakes
of the genus must necessarily partake of one of the species as well:
so that pleasure could not be a species of Motion, nor yet be one
of the individual phenomena comprised under the term 'motion'. For
individuals as well partake in the genus and the species, as (e.g.)
an individual man partakes of both 'man' and 'animal'. 

Moreover, see if the term placed in the genus has a wider denotation
than the genus, as (e.g.) 'object of opinion' has, as compared with
'being': for both what is and what is not are objects of opinion,
so that 'object of opinion' could not be a species of being: for the
genus is always of wider denotation than the species. Again, see if
the species and its genus have an equal denotation; suppose, for instance,
that of the attributes which go with everything, one were to be stated
as a species and the other as its genus, as for example Being and
Unity: for everything has being and unity, so that neither is the
genus of the other, since their denotation is equal. Likewise, also,
if the 'first' of a series and the 'beginning' were to be placed one
under the other: for the beginning is first and the first is the beginning,
so that either both expressions are identical or at any rate neither
is the genus of the other. The elementary principle in regard to all
such cases is that the genus has a wider denotation than the species
and its differentia: for the differentia as well has a narrower denotation
than the genus. 

See also whether the genus mentioned fails, or might be generally
thought to fail, to apply to some object which is not specifically
different from the thing in question; or, if your argument be constructive,
whether it does so apply. For all things that are not specifically
different have the same genus. If, therefore, it be shown to apply
to one, then clearly it applies to all, and if it fails to apply to
one, clearly it fails to apply to any; e.g. if any one who assumes
'indivisible lines' were to say that the 'indivisible' is their genus.
For the aforesaid term is not the genus of divisible lines, and these
do not differ as regards their species from indivisible: for straight
lines are never different from each other as regards their species.

Part 2

Look and see, also, if there be any other genus of the given species
which neither embraces the genus rendered nor yet falls under it,
e.g. suppose any one were to lay down that 'knowledge' is the genus
of justice. For virtue is its genus as well, and neither of these
genera embraces the remaining one, so that knowledge could not be
the genus of justice: for it is generally accepted that whenever one
species falls under two genera, the one is embraced by the other.
Yet a principle of this kind gives rise to a difficulty in some cases.
For some people hold that prudence is both virtue and knowledge, and
that neither of its genera is embraced by the other: although certainly
not everybody admits that prudence is knowledge. If, however, any
one were to admit the truth of this assertion, yet it would still
be generally agreed to be necessary that the genera of the same object
must at any rate be subordinate either the one to the other or both
to the same, as actually is the case with virtue and knowledge. For
both fall under the same genus; for each of them is a state and a
disposition. You should look, therefore, and see whether neither of
these things is true of the genus rendered; for if the genera be subordinate
neither the one to the other nor both to the same, then what is rendered
could not be the true genus. 

Look, also, at the genus of the genus rendered, and so continually
at the next higher genus, and see whether all are predicated of the
species, and predicated in the category of essence: for all the higher
genera should be predicated of the species in the category of essence.
If, then, there be anywhere a discrepancy, clearly what is rendered
is not the true genus. [Again, see whether either the genus itself,
or one of its higher genera, partakes of the species: for the higher
genus does not partake of any of the lower.] If, then, you are overthrowing
a view, follow the rule as given: if establishing one, then-suppose
that what has been named as genus be admitted to belong to the species,
only it be disputed whether it belongs as genus-it is enough to show
that one of its higher genera is predicated of the species in the
category of essence. For if one of them be predicated in the category
of essence, all of them, both higher and lower than this one, if predicated
at all of the species, will be predicated of it in the category of
essence: so that what has been rendered as genus is also predicated
in the category of essence. The premiss that when one genus is predicated
in the category of essence, all the rest, if predicated at all, will
be predicated in the category of essence, should be secured by induction.
Supposing, however, that it be disputed whether what has been rendered
as genus belongs at all, it is not enough to show that one of the
higher genera is predicated of the species in the category of essence:
e.g. if any one has rendered 'locomotion' as the genus of walking,
it is not enough to show that walking is 'motion' in order to show
that it is 'locomotion', seeing that there are other forms of motion
as well; but one must show in addition that walking does not partake
of any of the species of motion produced by the same division except
locomotion. For of necessity what partakes of the genus partakes also
of one of the species produced by the first division of the genus.
If, therefore, walking does not partake either of increase or decrease
or of the other kinds of motion, clearly it would partake of locomotion,
so that locomotion would be the genus of walking. 

Again, look among the things of which the given species is predicated
as genus, and see if what is rendered as its genus be also predicated
in the category of essence of the very things of which the species
is so predicated, and likewise if all the genera higher than this
genus are so predicated as well. For if there be anywhere a discrepancy,
clearly what has been rendered is not the true genus: for had it been
the genus, then both the genera higher than it, and it itself, would
all have been predicated in the category of essence of those objects
of which the species too is predicated in the category of essence.
If, then, you are overthrowing a view, it is useful to see whether
the genus fails to be predicated in the category of essence of those
things of which the species too is predicated. If establishing a view,
it is useful to see whether it is predicated in the category of essence:
for if so, the result will be that the genus and the species will
be predicated of the same object in the category of essence, so that
the same object falls under two genera: the genera must therefore
of necessity be subordinate one to the other, and therefore if it
be shown that the one we wish to establish as genus is not subordinate
to the species, clearly the species would be subordinate to it, so
that you may take it as shown that it is the genus. 

Look, also, at the definitions of the genera, and see whether they
apply both to the given species and to the objects which partake of
the species. For of necessity the definitions of its genera must be
predicated of the species and of the objects which partake of the
species: if, then, there be anywhere a discrepancy, clearly what has
been rendered is not the genus. 

Again, see if he has rendered the differentia as the genus, e.g. 'immortal'
as the genus of 'God'. For 'immortal' is a differentia of 'living
being', seeing that of living beings some are mortal and others immortal.
Clearly, then, a bad mistake has been made; for the differentia of
a thing is never its genus. And that this is true is clear: for a
thing's differentia never signifies its essence, but rather some quality,
as do 'walking' and 'biped'. 

Also, see whether he has placed the differentia inside the genus,
e.g. by taking 'odd' as a number'. For 'odd' is a differentia of number,
not a species. Nor is the differentia generally thought to partake
of the genus: for what partakes of the genus is always either a species
or an individual, whereas the differentia is neither a species nor
an individual. Clearly, therefore, the differentia does not partake
of the genus, so that 'odd' too is no species but a differentia, seeing
that it does not partake of the genus. 

Moreover, see whether he has placed the genus inside the species,
e.g. by taking 'contact' to be a 'juncture', or 'mixture' a 'fusion',
or, as in Plato's definition,' 'locomotion' to be the same as 'carriage'.
For there is no necessity that contact should be juncture: rather,
conversely, juncture must be contact: for what is in contact is not
always joined, though what is joined is always in contact. Likewise,
also, in the remaining instances: for mixture is not always a 'fusion'
(for to mix dry things does not fuse them), nor is locomotion always
'carriage'. For walking is not generally thought to be carriage: for
'carriage' is mostly used of things that change one place for another
involuntarily, as happens in the case of inanimate things. Clearly,
also, the species, in the instances given, has a wider denotation
than the genus, whereas it ought to be vice versa. Again, see whether
he has placed the differentia inside the species, by taking (e.g.)
'immortal' to be 'a god'. For the result will be that the species
has an equal or wider denotation: and this cannot be, for always the
differentia has an equal or a wider denotation than the species. Moreover,
see whether he has placed the genus inside the differentia, by making
'colour' (e.g.) to be a thing that 'pierces', or 'number' a thing
that is 'odd'. Also, see if he has mentioned the genus as differentia:
for it is possible for a man to bring forward a statement of this
kind as well, e.g. that 'mixture' is the differentia of 'fusion',
or that change of place' is the differentia of 'carriage'. All such
cases should be examined by means of the same principles: for they
depend upon common rules: for the genus should have a wider denotation
that its differentia, and also should not partake of its differentia;
whereas, if it be rendered in this manner, neither of the aforesaid
requirements can be satisfied: for the genus will both have a narrower
denotation than its differentia, and will partake of it.

Again, if no differentia belonging to the genus be predicated of the
given species, neither will the genus be predicated of it; e.g. of
'soul' neither 'odd' nor 'even' is predicated: neither therefore is
'number'. Moreover, see whether the species is naturally prior and
abolishes the genus along with itself: for the contrary is the general
view. Moreover, if it be possible for the genus stated, or for its
differentia, to be absent from the alleged species, e.g. for 'movement'
to be absent from the 'soul', or 'truth and falsehood' from 'opinion',
then neither of the terms stated could be its genus or its differentia:
for the general view is that the genus and the differentia accompany
the species, as long as it exists. 

Part 3

Look and see, also, if what is placed in the genus partakes or could
possibly partake of any contrary of the genus: for in that case the
same thing will at the same time partake of contrary things, seeing
that the genus is never absent from it, while it partakes, or can
possibly partake, of the contrary genus as well. Moreover, see whether
the species shares in any character which it is utterly impossible
for any member of the genus to have. Thus (e.g.) if the soul has a
share in life, while it is impossible for any number to live, then
the soul could not be a species of number. 

You should look and see, also, if the species be a homonym of the
genus, and employ as your elementary principles those already stated
for dealing with homonymity: for the genus and the species are synonymous.

Seeing that of every genus there is more than one species, look and
see if it be impossible that there should be another species than
the given one belonging to the genus stated: for if there should be
none, then clearly what has been stated could not be a genus at all.

Look and see, also, if he has rendered as genus a metaphorical expression,
describing (e.g. 'temperance' as a 'harmony': a 'harmony': for a genus
is always predicated of its species in its literal sense, whereas
'harmony' is predicated of temperance not in a literal sense but metaphorically:
for a harmony always consists in notes. 

Moreover, if there be any contrary of the species, examine it. The
examination may take different forms; first of all see if the contrary
as well be found in the same genus as the species, supposing the genus
to have no contrary; for contraries ought to be found in the same
genus, if there be no contrary to the genus. Supposing, on the other
hand, that there is a contrary to the genus, see if the contrary of
the species be found in the contrary genus: for of necessity the contrary
species must be in the contrary genus, if there be any contrary to
the genus. Each of these points is made plain by means of induction.
Again, see whether the contrary of the species be not found in any
genus at all, but be itself a genus, e.g. 'good': for if this be not
found in any genus, neither will its contrary be found in any genus,
but will itself be a genus, as happens in the case of 'good' and 'evil':
for neither of these is found in a genus, but each of them is a genus.
Moreover, see if both genus and species be contrary to something,
and one pair of contraries have an intermediary, but not the other.
For if the genera have an intermediary, so should their species as
well, and if the species have, so should their genera as well, as
is the case with (1) virtue and vice and (2) justice and injustice:
for each pair has an intermediary. An objection to this is that there
is no intermediary between health and disease, although there is one
between evil and good. Or see whether, though there be indeed an intermediary
between both pairs, i.e. both between the species and between the
genera, yet it be not similarly related, but in one case be a mere
negation of the extremes, whereas in the other case it is a subject.
For the general view is that the relation should be similar in both
cases, as it is in the cases of virtue and vice and of justice and
injustice: for the intermediaries between both are mere negations.
Moreover, whenever the genus has no contrary, look and see not merely
whether the contrary of the species be found in the same genus, but
the intermediate as well: for the genus containing the extremes contains
the intermediates as well, as (e.g.) in the case of white and black:
for 'colour' is the genus both of these and of all the intermediate
colours as well. An objection may be raised that 'defect' and 'excess'
are found in the same genus (for both are in the genus 'evil'), whereas
moderate amount', the intermediate between them, is found not in 'evil'
but in 'good'. Look and see also whether, while the genus has a contrary,
the species has none; for if the genus be contrary to anything, so
too is the species, as virtue to vice and justice to injustice.

Likewise. also, if one were to look at other instances, one would
come to see clearly a fact like this. An objection may be raised in
the case of health and disease: for health in general is the contrary
of disease, whereas a particular disease, being a species of disease,
e.g. fever and ophthalmia and any other particular disease, has no
contrary. 

If, therefore, you are demolishing a view, there are all these ways
in which you should make your examination: for if the aforesaid characters
do not belong to it, clearly what has been rendered is not the genus.
If, on the other hand, you are establishing a view, there are three
ways: in the first place, see whether the contrary of the species
be found in the genus stated, suppose the genus have no contrary:
for if the contrary be found in it, clearly the species in question
is found in it as well. Moreover, see if the intermediate species
is found in the genus stated: for whatever genus contains the intermediate
contains the extremes as well. Again, if the genus have a contrary,
look and see whether also the contrary species is found in the contrary
genus: for if so, clearly also the species in question is found in
the genus in question. 

Again, consider in the case of the inflexions and the co-ordinates
of species and genus, and see whether they follow likewise, both in
demolishing and in establishing a view. For whatever attribute belongs
or does not belong to one belongs or does not belong at the same time
to all; e.g. if justice be a particular form of knowledge, then also
'justly' is 'knowingly' and the just man is a man of knowledge: whereas
if any of these things be not so, then neither is any of the rest
of them. 

Part 4

Again, consider the case of things that bear a like relation to one
another. Thus (e.g.) the relation of the pleasant to pleasure is like
that of the useful to the good: for in each case the one produces
the other. If therefore pleasure be a kind of 'good', then also the
pleasant will be a kind of 'useful': for clearly it may be taken to
be productive of good, seeing that pleasure is good. In the same way
also consider the case of processes of generation and destruction;
if (e.g.) to build be to be active, then to have built is to have
been active, and if to learn be to recollect, then also to have learnt
is to have recollected, and if to be decomposed be to be destroyed,
then to have been decomposed is to have been destroyed, and decomposition
is a kind of destruction. Consider also in the same way the case of
things that generate or destroy, and of the capacities and uses of
things; and in general, both in demolishing and in establishing an
argument, you should examine things in the light of any resemblance
of whatever description, as we were saying in the case of generation
and destruction. For if what tends to destroy tends to decompose,
then also to be destroyed is to be decomposed: and if what tends to
generate tends to produce, then to be generated is to be produced,
and generation is production. Likewise, also, in the case of the capacities
and uses of things: for if a capacity be a disposition, then also
to be capable of something is to be disposed to it, and if the use
of anything be an activity, then to use it is to be active, and to
have used it is to have been active. 

If the opposite of the species be a privation, there are two ways
of demolishing an argument, first of all by looking to see if the
opposite be found in the genus rendered: for either the privation
is to be found absolutely nowhere in the same genus, or at least not
in the same ultimate genus: e.g. if the ultimate genus containing
sight be sensation, then blindness will not be a sensation. Secondly,
if there be a sensation. Secondly, if there be a privation opposed
to both genus and species, but the opposite of the species be not
found in the opposite of the genus, then neither could the species
rendered be in the genus rendered. If, then, you are demolishing a
view, you should follow the rule as stated; but if establishing one
there is but one way: for if the opposite species be found in the
opposite genus, then also the species in question would be found in
the genus in question: e.g. if 'blindness' be a form of 'insensibility',
then 'sight' is a form of 'sensation'. 

Again, look at the negations of the genus and species and convert
the order of terms, according to the method described in the case
of Accident: e.g. if the pleasant be a kind of good, what is not good
is not pleasant. For were this no something not good as well would
then be pleasant. That, however, cannot be, for it is impossible,
if 'good' be the genus of pleasant, that anything not good should
be pleasant: for of things of which the genus is not predicated, none
of the species is predicated either. Also, in establishing a view,
you should adopt the same method of examination: for if what is not
good be not pleasant, then what is pleasant is good, so that 'good'
is the genus of 'pleasant'. 

If the species be a relative term, see whether the genus be a relative
term as well: for if the species be a relative term, so too is the
genus, as is the case with 'double' and 'multiple': for each is a
relative term. If, on the other hand, the genus be a relative term,
there is no necessity that the species should be so as well: for 'knowledge'is
a relative term, but not so 'grammar'. Or possibly not even the first
statement would be generally considered true: for virtue is a kind
of 'noble' and a kind of 'good' thing, and yet, while 'virtue' is
a relative term, 'good' and 'noble' are not relatives but qualities.
Again, see whether the species fails to be used in the same relation
when called by its own name, and when called by the name of its genus:
e.g. if the term 'double' be used to mean the double of a 'half',
then also the term 'multiple' ought to be used to mean multiple of
a 'half'. Otherwise 'multiple' could not be the genus of 'double'.

Moreover, see whether the term fail to be used in the same relation
both when called by the name of its genus, and also when called by
those of all the genera of its genus. For if the double be a multiple
of a half, then 'in excess of 'will also be used in relation to a
'half': and, in general, the double will be called by the names of
all the higher genera in relation to a 'half'. An objection may be
raised that there is no necessity for a term to be used in the same
relation when called by its own name and when called by that of its
genus: for 'knowledge' is called knowledge 'of an object', whereas
it is called a 'state' and 'disposition' not of an 'object' but of
the 'soul'. 

Again, see whether the genus and the species be used in the same way
in respect of the inflexions they take, e.g. datives and genitives
and all the rest. For as the species is used, so should the genus
be as well, as in the case of 'double' and its higher genera: for
we say both 'double of' and 'multiple of' a thing. Likewise, also,
in the case of 'knowledge': for both knowledge' itself and its genera,
e.g. 'disposition' and 'state', are said to be 'of' something. An
objection may be raised that in some cases it is not so: for we say
'superior to' and 'contrary to' so and so, whereas 'other', which
is the genus of these terms, demands not 'to' but 'than': for the
expression is 'other than' so and so. 

Again, see whether terms used in like case relationships fail to yield
a like construction when converted, as do 'double' and 'multiple'.
For each of these terms takes a genitive both in itself and in its
converted form: for we say both a half of' and 'a fraction of' something.
The case is the same also as regards both 'knowledge' and 'conception':
for these take a genitive, and by conversion an 'object of knowledge'
and an 'object of conception' are both alike used with a dative. If,
then, in any cases the constructions after conversion be not alike,
clearly the one term is not the genus of the other. 

Again, see whether the species and the genus fail to be used in relation
to an equal number of things: for the general view is that the uses
of both are alike and equal in number, as is the case with 'present'
and 'grant'. For a present' is of something or to some one, and also
a 'grant' is of something and to some one: and 'grant' is the genus
of 'present', for a 'present' is a 'grant that need not be returned'.
In some cases, however, the number of relations in which the terms
are used happens not to be equal, for while 'double' is double of
something, we speak of 'in excess' or 'greater' in something, as well
as of or than something: for what is in excess or greater is always
in excess in something, as well as in excess of something. Hence the
terms in question are not the genera of 'double', inasmuch as they
are not used in relation to an equal number of things with the species.
Or possibly it is not universally true that species and genus are
used in relation to an equal number of things. 

See, also, if the opposite of the species have the opposite of the
genus as its genus, e.g. whether, if 'multiple' be the genus of 'double',
'fraction' be also the genus of 'half'. For the opposite of the genus
should always be the genus of the opposite species. If, then, any
one were to assert that knowledge is a kind of sensation, then also
the object of knowledge will have to be a kind of object of sensation,
whereas it is not: for an object of knowledge is not always an object
of sensation: for objects of knowledge include some of the objects
of intuition as well. Hence 'object of sensation' is not the genus
of 'object of knowledge': and if this be so, neither is 'sensation'
the genus of 'knowledge'. 

Seeing that of relative terms some are of necessity found in, or used
of, the things in relation to which they happen at any time to be
used (e.g. 'disposition' and 'state' and 'balance'; for in nothing
else can the aforesaid terms possibly be found except in the things
in relation to which they are used), while others need not be found
in the things in relation to which they are used at any time, though
they still may be (e.g. if the term 'object of knowledge' be applied
to the soul: for it is quite possible that the knowledge of itself
should be possessed by the soul itself, but it is not necessary, for
it is possible for this same knowledge to be found in some one else),
while for others, again, it is absolutely impossible that they should
be found in the things in relation to which they happen at any time
to be used (as e.g. that the contrary should be found in the contrary
or knowledge in the object of knowledge, unless the object of knowledge
happen to be a soul or a man)-you should look, therefore, and see
whether he places a term of one kind inside a genus that is not of
that kind, e.g. suppose he has said that 'memory' is the 'abiding
of knowledge'. For 'abiding' is always found in that which abides,
and is used of that, so that the abiding of knowledge also will be
found in knowledge. Memory, then, is found in knowledge, seeing that
it is the abiding of knowledge. But this is impossible, for memory
is always found in the soul. The aforesaid commonplace rule is common
to the subject of Accident as well: for it is all the same to say
that 'abiding' is the genus of memory, or to allege that it is an
accident of it. For if in any way whatever memory be the abiding of
knowledge, the same argument in regard to it will apply.

Part 5

Again, see if he has placed what is a 'state' inside the genus 'activity',
or an activity inside the genus 'state', e.g. by defining 'sensation'
as 'movement communicated through the body': for sensation is a 'state',
whereas movement is an 'activity'. Likewise, also, if he has said
that memory is a 'state that is retentive of a conception', for memory
is never a state, but rather an activity. 

They also make a bad mistake who rank a 'state' within the 'capacity'
that attends it, e.g. by defining 'good temper' as the 'control of
anger', and 'courage' and 'justice' as 'control of fears' and of 'gains':
for the terms 'courageous' and 'good-tempered' are applied to a man
who is immune from passion, whereas 'self-controlled' describes the
man who is exposed to passion and not led by it. Quite possibly, indeed,
each of the former is attended by a capacity such that, if he were
exposed to passion, he would control it and not be led by it: but,
for all that, this is not what is meant by being 'courageous' in the
one case, and 'good tempered' in the other; what is meant is an absolute
immunity from any passions of that kind at all. 

Sometimes, also, people state any kind of attendant feature as the
genus, e.g. 'pain' as the genus of 'anger' and 'conception' as that
of conviction'. For both of the things in question follow in a certain
sense upon the given species, but neither of them is genus to it.
For when the angry man feels pain, the pain bas appeared in him earlier
than the anger: for his anger is not the cause of his pain, but his
pain of his anger, so that anger emphatically is not pain. By the
same reasoning, neither is conviction conception: for it is possible
to have the same conception even without being convinced of it, whereas
this is impossible if conviction be a species of conception: for it
is impossible for a thing still to remain the same if it be entirely
transferred out of its species, just as neither could the same animal
at one time be, and at another not be, a man. If, on the other hand,
any one says that a man who has a conception must of necessity be
also convinced of it, then 'conception' and 'conviction' will be used
with an equal denotation, so that not even so could the former be
the genus of the latter: for the denotation of the genus should be
wider. 

See, also, whether both naturally come to be anywhere in the same
thing: for what contains the species contains the genus as well: e.g.
what contains 'white' contains 'colour' as well, and what contains
'knowledge of grammar' contains 'knowledge' as well. If, therefore,
any one says that 'shame' is 'fear', or that 'anger' is 'pain', the
result will be that genus and species are not found in the same thing:
for shame is found in the 'reasoning' faculty, whereas fear is in
the 'spirited' faculty, and 'pain' is found in the faculty of 'desires'.
(for in this pleasure also is found), whereas 'anger' is found in
the 'spirited' faculty. Hence the terms rendered are not the genera,
seeing that they do not naturally come to be in the same faculty as
the species. Likewise, also, if 'friendship' be found in the faculty
of desires, you may take it that it is not a form of 'wishing': for
wishing is always found in the 'reasoning' faculty. This commonplace
rule is useful also in dealing with Accident: for the accident and
that of which it is an accident are both found in the same thing,
so that if they do not appear in the same thing, clearly it is not
an accident. 

Again, see if the species partakes of the genus attributed only in
some particular respect: for it is the general view that the genus
is not thus imparted only in some particular respect: for a man is
not an animal in a particular respect, nor is grammar knowledge in
a particular respect only. Likewise also in other instances. Look,
therefore, and see if in the case of any of its species the genus
be imparted only in a certain respect; e.g. if 'animal' has been described
as an 'object of perception' or of 'sight'. For an animal is an object
of perception or of sight in a particular respect only; for it is
in respect of its body that it is perceived and seen, not in respect
of its soul, so that-'object of sight' and 'object of perception'
could not be the genus of 'animal'. 

Sometimes also people place the whole inside the part without detection,
defining (e.g.) 'animal' as an 'animate body'; whereas the part is
not predicated in any sense of the whole, so that 'body' could not
be the genus of animal, seeing that it is a part. 

See also if he has put anything that is blameworthy or objectionable
into the class 'capacity' or 'capable', e.g. by defining a 'sophist'
or a 'slanderer', or a 'thief' as 'one who is capable of secretly
thieving other people's property'. For none of the aforesaid characters
is so called because he is 'capable' in one of these respects: for
even God and the good man are capable of doing bad things, but that
is not their character: for it is always in respect of their choice
that bad men are so called. Moreover, a capacity is always a desirable
thing: for even the capacities for doing bad things are desirable,
and therefore it is we say that even God and the good man possess
them; for they are capable (we say) of doing evil. So then 'capacity'
can never be the genus of anything blameworthy. Else, the result will
be that what is blameworthy is sometimes desirable: for there will
be a certain form of capacity that is blameworthy. 

Also, see if he has put anything that is precious or desirable for
its own sake into the class 'capacity' or 'capable' or 'productive'
of anything. For capacity, and what is capable or productive of anything,
is always desirable for the sake of something else. 

Or see if he has put anything that exists in two genera or more into
one of them only. For some things it is impossible to place in a single
genus, e.g. the 'cheat' and the 'slanderer': for neither he who has
the will without the capacity, nor he who has the capacity without
the will, is a slanderer or cheat, but he who has both of them. Hence
he must be put not into one genus, but into both the aforesaid genera.

Moreover, people sometimes in converse order render genus as differentia,
and differentia as genus, defining (e.g.) astonishment as 'excess
of wonderment' and conviction as 'vehemence of conception'. For neither
'excess' nor 'vehemence' is the genus, but the differentia: for astonishment
is usually taken to be an 'excessive wonderment', and conviction to
be a 'vehement conception', so that 'wonderment' and 'conception'
are the genus, while 'excess' and 'vehemence' are the differentia.
Moreover, if any one renders 'excess' and 'vehemence' as genera, then
inanimate things will be convinced and astonished. For 'vehemence'
and 'excess' of a thing are found in a thing which is thus vehement
and in excess. If, therefore, astonishment be excess of wonderment
the astonishment will be found in the wonderment, so that 'wonderment'
will be astonished! Likewise, also, conviction will be found in the
conception, if it be 'vehemence of conception', so that the conception
will be convinced. Moreover, a man who renders an answer in this style
will in consequence find himself calling vehemence vehement and excess
excessive: for there is such a thing as a vehement conviction: if
then conviction be 'vehemence', there would be a 'vehement vehemence'.
Likewise, also, there is such a thing as excessive astonishment: if
then astonishment be an excess, there would be an 'excessive excess'.
Whereas neither of these things is generally believed, any more than
that knowledge is a knower or motion a moving thing. 

Sometimes, too, people make the bad mistake of putting an affection
into that which is affected, as its genus, e.g. those who say that
immortality is everlasting life: for immortality seems to be a certain
affection or accidental feature of life. That this saying is true
would appear clear if any one were to admit that a man can pass from
being mortal and become immortal: for no one will assert that he takes
another life, but that a certain accidental feature or affection enters
into this one as it is. So then 'life' is not the genus of immortality.

Again, see if to an affection he has ascribed as genus the object
of which it is an affection, by defining (e.g.) wind as 'air in motion'.
Rather, wind is 'a movement of air': for the same air persists both
when it is in motion and when it is still. Hence wind is not 'air'
at all: for then there would also have been wind when the air was
not in motion, seeing that the same air which formed the wind persists.
Likewise, also, in other cases of the kind. Even, then, if we ought
in this instance to admit the point that wind is 'air in motion',
yet we should accept a definition of the kind, not about all those
things of which the genus is not true, but only in cases where the
genus rendered is a true predicate. For in some cases, e.g. 'mud'
or 'snow', it is not generally held to be true. For people tell you
that snow is 'frozen water' and mud is earth mixed with moisture',
whereas snow is not water, nor mud earth, so that neither of the terms
rendered could be the genus: for the genus should be true of all its
species. Likewise neither is wine 'fermented water', as Empedocles
speaks of 'water fermented in wood';' for it simply is not water at
all. 

Part 6

Moreover, see whether the term rendered fail to be the genus of anything
at all; for then clearly it also fails to be the genus of the species
mentioned. Examine the point by seeing whether the objects that partake
of the genus fail to be specifically different from one another, e.g.
white objects: for these do not differ specifically from one another,
whereas of a genus the species are always different, so that 'white'
could not be the genus of anything. 

Again, see whether he has named as genus or differentia some feature
that goes with everything: for the number of attributes that follow
everything is comparatively large: thus (e.g.) 'Being' and 'Unity'
are among the number of attributes that follow everything. If, therefore,
he has rendered 'Being' as a genus, clearly it would be the genus
of everything, seeing that it is predicated of everything; for the
genus is never predicated of anything except of its species. Hence
Unity, inter alia, will be a species of Being. The result, therefore,
is that of all things of which the genus is predicated, the species
is predicated as well, seeing that Being and Unity are predicates
of absolutely everything, whereas the predication of the species ought
to be of narrower range. If, on the other hand, he has named as differentia
some attribute that follows everything, clearly the denotation of
the differentia will be equal to, or wider than, that of the genus.
For if the genus, too, be some attribute that follows everything,
the denotation of the differentia will be equal to its denotation,
while if the genus do not follow everything, it will be still wider.

Moreover, see if the description 'inherent in S' be used of the genus
rendered in relation to its species, as it is used of 'white' in the
case of snow, thus showing clearly that it could not be the genus:
for 'true of S' is the only description used of the genus in relation
to its species. Look and see also if the genus fails to be synonymous
with its species. For the genus is always predicated of its species
synonymously. 

Moreover, beware, whenever both species and genus have a contrary,
and he places the better of the contraries inside the worse genus:
for the result will be that the remaining species will be found in
the remaining genus, seeing that contraries are found in contrary
genera, so that the better species will be found in the worse genus
and the worse in the better: whereas the usual view is that of the
better species the genus too is better. Also see if he has placed
the species inside the worse and not inside the better genus, when
it is at the same time related in like manner to both, as (e.g.) if
he has defined the 'soul' as a 'form of motion' or 'a form of moving
thing'. For the same soul is usually thought to be a principle alike
of rest and of motion, so that, if rest is the better of the two,
this is the genus into which the soul should have been put.

Moreover, judge by means of greater and less degrees: if overthrowing
a view, see whether the genus admits of a greater degree, whereas
neither the species itself does so, nor any term that is called after
it: e.g. if virtue admits of a greater degree, so too does justice
and the just man: for one man is called 'more just than another'.
If, therefore, the genus rendered admits of a greater degree, whereas
neither the species does so itself nor yet any term called after it,
then what has been rendered could not be the genus. 

Again, if what is more generally, or as generally, thought to be the
genus be not so, clearly neither is the genus rendered. The commonplace
rule in question is useful especially in cases where the species appears
to have several predicates in the category of essence, and where no
distinction has been drawn between them, and we cannot say which of
them is genus; e.g. both 'pain' and the 'conception of a slight' are
usually thought to be predicates of 'anger in the category of essence:
for the angry man is both in pain and also conceives that he is slighted.
The same mode of inquiry may be applied also to the case of the species,
by comparing it with some other species: for if the one which is more
generally, or as generally, thought to be found in the genus rendered
be not found therein, then clearly neither could the species rendered
be found therein. 

In demolishing a view, therefore, you should follow the rule as stated.
In establishing one, on the other hand, the commonplace rule that
you should see if both the genus rendered and the species admit of
a greater degree will not serve: for even though both admit it, it
is still possible for one not to be the genus of the other. For both
'beautiful' and 'white' admit of a greater degree, and neither is
the genus of the other. On the other hand, the comparison of the genera
and of the species one with another is of use: e.g. supposing A and
B to have a like claim to be genus, then if one be a genus, so also
is the other. Likewise, also, if what has less claim be a genus, so
also is what has more claim: e.g. if 'capacity' have more claim than
'virtue' to be the genus of self-control, and virtue be the genus,
so also is capacity. The same observations will apply also in the
case of the species. For instance, supposing A and B to have a like
claim to be a species of the genus in question, then if the one be
a species, so also is the other: and if that which is less generally
thought to be so be a species, so also is that which is more generally
thought to be so. 

Moreover, to establish a view, you should look and see if the genus
is predicated in the category of essence of those things of which
it has been rendered as the genus, supposing the species rendered
to be not one single species but several different ones: for then
clearly it will be the genus. If, on the other, the species rendered
be single, look and see whether the genus be predicated in the category
of essence of other species as well: for then, again, the result will
be that it is predicated of several different species. 

Since some people think that the differentia, too, is a predicate
of the various species in the category of essence, you should distinguish
the genus from the differentia by employing the aforesaid elementary
principles-(a) that the genus has a wider denotation than the differentia;
(b) that in rendering the essence of a thing it is more fitting to
state the genus than the differentia: for any one who says that 'man'
is an 'animal' shows what man is better than he who describes him
as 'walking'; also (c) that the differentia always signifies a quality
of the genus, whereas the genus does not do this of the differentia:
for he who says 'walking' describes an animal of a certain quality,
whereas he who says 'animal' describes an animal of a certain quality,
whereas he who says 'animal' does not describe a walking thing of
a certain quality. 

The differentia, then, should be distinguished from the genus in this
manner. Now seeing it is generally held that if what is musical, in
being musical, possesses knowledge in some respect, then also 'music'
is a particular kind of 'knowledge'; and also that if what walks is
moved in walking, then 'walking' is a particular kind of 'movement';
you should therefore examine in the aforesaid manner any genus in
which you want to establish the existence of something; e.g. if you
wish to prove that 'knowledge' is a form of 'conviction', see whether
the knower in knowing is convinced: for then clearly knowledge would
be a particular kind of conviction. You should proceed in the same
way also in regard to the other cases of this kind. 

Moreover, seeing that it is difficult to distinguish whatever always
follows along with a thing, and is not convertible with it, from its
genus, if A follows B universally, whereas B does not follow A universally-as
e.g. 'rest' always follows a 'calm' and 'divisibility' follows 'number',
but not conversely (for the divisible is not always a number, nor
rest a calm)-you may yourself assume in your treatment of them that
the one which always follows is the genus, whenever the other is not
convertible with it: if, on the other hand, some one else puts forward
the proposition, do not accept it universally. An objection to it
is that 'not-being' always follows what is 'coming to be' (for what
is coming to be is not) and is not convertible with it (for what is
not is not always coming to be), and that still 'not-being' is not
the genus of 'coming to be': for 'not-being' has not any species at
all. Questions, then, in regard to Genus should be investigated in
the ways described. 

 

BOOK V

Part 1 

The question whether the attribute stated is or is not a property,
should be examined by the following methods: 

Any 'property' rendered is always either essential and permanent or
relative and temporary: e.g. it is an 'essential property' of man
to be 'by nature a civilized animal': a 'relative property' is one
like that of the soul in relation to the body, viz. that the one is
fitted to command, and the other to obey: a 'permanent property' is
one like the property which belongs to God, of being an 'immortal
living being': a 'temporary property' is one like the property which
belongs to any particular man of walking in the gymnasium.

[The rendering of a property 'relatively' gives rise either to two
problems or to four. For if he at the same time render this property
of one thing and deny it of another, only two problems arise, as in
the case of a statement that it is a property of a man, in relation
to a horse, to be a biped. For one might try both to show that a man
is not a biped, and also that a horse is a biped: in both ways the
property would be upset. If on the other hand he render one apiece
of two attributes to each of two things, and deny it in each case
of the other, there will then be four problems; as in the case of
a statement that it is a property of a man in relation to a horse
for the former to be a biped and the latter a quadruped. For then
it is possible to try to show both that a man is not naturally a biped,
and that he is a quadruped, and also that the horse both is a biped,
and is not a quadruped. If you show any of these at all, the intended
attribute is demolished.] 

An 'essential' property is one which is rendered of a thing in comparison
with everything else and distinguishes the said thing from everything
else, as does 'a mortal living being capable of receiving knowledge'
in the case of man. A 'relative' property is one which separates its
subject off not from everything else but only from a particular definite
thing, as does the property which virtue possesses, in comparison
with knowledge, viz. that the former is naturally produced in more
than one faculty, whereas the latter is produced in that of reason
alone, and in those who have a reasoning faculty. A 'permanent' property
is one which is true at every time, and never fails, like being' compounded
of soul and body', in the case of a living creature. A 'temporary'
property is one which is true at some particular time, and does not
of necessity always follow; as, of some particular man, that he walks
in the market-place. 

To render a property 'relatively' to something else means to state
the difference between them as it is found either universally and
always, or generally and in most cases: thus a difference that is
found universally and always, is one such as man possesses in comparison
with a horse, viz. being a biped: for a man is always and in every
case a biped, whereas a horse is never a biped at any time. On the
other hand, a difference that is found generally and in most cases,
is one such as the faculty of reason possesses in comparison with
that of desire and spirit, in that the former commands, while the
latter obeys: for the reasoning faculty does not always command, but
sometimes also is under command, nor is that of desire and spirit
always under command, but also on occasion assumes the command, whenever
the soul of a man is vicious. 

Of 'properties' the most 'arguable' are the essential and permanent
and the relative. For a relative property gives rise, as we said before,
to several questions: for of necessity the questions arising are either
two or four, or that arguments in regard to these are several. An
essential and a permanent property you can discuss in relation to
many things, or can observe in relation to many periods of time: if
essential', discuss it in comparison with many things: for the property
ought to belong to its subject in comparison with every single thing
that is, so that if the subject be not distinguished by it in comparison
with everything else, the property could not have been rendered correctly.
So a permanent property you should observe in relation to many periods
of time; for if it does not or did not, or is not going to, belong,
it will not be a property. On the other hand, about a temporary property
we do not inquire further than in regard to the time called 'the present';
and so arguments in regard to it are not many; whereas an arguable'
question is one in regard to which it is possible for arguments both
numerous and good to arise. 

The so-called 'relative' property, then, should be examined by means
of the commonplace arguments relating to Accident, to see whether
it belongs to the one thing and not to the other: on the other hand,
permanent and essential properties should be considered by the following
methods. 

Part 2

First, see whether the property has or has not been rendered correctly.
Of a rendering being incorrect or correct, one test is to see whether
the terms in which the property is stated are not or are more intelligible-for
destructive purposes, whether they are not so, and for constructive
purposes, whether they are so. Of the terms not being more intelligible,
one test is to see whether the property which he renders is altogether
more unintelligible than the subject whose property he has stated:
for, if so, the property will not have been stated correctly. For
the object of getting a property constituted is to be intelligible:
the terms therefore in which it is rendered should be more intelligible:
for in that case it will be possible to conceive it more adequately,
e.g. any one who has stated that it is a property of 'fire' to 'bear
a very close resemblance to the soul', uses the term 'soul', which
is less intelligible than 'fire'-for we know better what fire is than
what soul is-, and therefore a 'very close resemblance to the soul'
could not be correctly stated to be a property of fire. Another test
is to see whether the attribution of A (property) to B (subject) fails
to be more intelligible. For not only should the property be more
intelligible than its subject, but also it should be something whose
attribution to the particular subject is a more intelligible attribution.
For he who does not know whether it is an attribute of the particular
subject at all, will not know either whether it belongs to it alone,
so that whichever of these results happens, its character as a property
becomes obscure. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property
of fire to be 'the primary element wherein the soul is naturally found',
has introduced a subject which is less intelligible than 'fire', viz.
whether the soul is found in it, and whether it is found there primarily;
and therefore to be 'the primary element in which the soul is naturally
found' could not be correctly stated to be a property of 'fire'. On
the other hand, for constructive purposes, see whether the terms in
which the property is stated are more intelligible, and if they are
more intelligible in each of the aforesaid ways. For then the property
will have been correctly stated in this respect: for of constructive
arguments, showing the correctness of a rendering, some will show
the correctness merely in this respect, while others will show it
without qualification. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that the 'possession
of sensation' is a property of 'animal' has both used more intelligible
terms and has rendered the property more intelligible in each of the
aforesaid senses; so that to 'possess sensation' would in this respect
have been correctly rendered as a property of 'animal'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether any of the terms rendered
in the property is used in more than one sense, or whether the whole
expression too signifies more than one thing. For then the property
will not have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) seeing that to 'being
natural sentient' signifies more than one thing, viz. (1) to possess
sensation, (2) to use one's sensation, being naturally sentient' could
not be a correct statement of a property of 'animal'. The reason why
the term you use, or the whole expression signifying the property,
should not bear more than one meaning is this, that an expression
bearing more than one meaning makes the object described obscure,
because the man who is about to attempt an argument is in doubt which
of the various senses the expression bears: and this will not do,
for the object of rendering the property is that he may understand.
Moreover, in addition to this, it is inevitable that those who render
a property after this fashion should be somehow refuted whenever any
one addresses his syllogism to that one of the term's several meanings
which does not agree. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,
see whether both all the terms and also the expression as a whole
avoid bearing more than one sense: for then the property will have
been correctly stated in this respect. Thus (e.g.) seeing that 'body'
does not bear several meanings, nor quickest to move upwards in space',
nor yet the whole expression made by putting them together, it would
be correct in this respect to say that it is a property of fire to
be the 'body quickest to move upwards in space'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the term of which he renders
the property is used in more than one sense, and no distinction has
been drawn as to which of them it is whose property he is stating:
for then the property will not have been correctly rendered. The reasons
why this is so are quite clear from what has been said above: for
the same results are bound to follow. Thus (e.g.) seeing that 'the
knowledge of this' signifies many things for it means (1) the possession
of knowledge by it, (2) the use of its knowledge by it, (3) the existence
of knowledge about it, (4) the use of knowledge about it-no property
of the 'knowledge of this' could be rendered correctly unless he draw
a distinction as to which of these it is whose property he is rendering.
For constructive purposes, a man should see if the term of which he
is rendering the property avoids bearing many senses and is one and
simple: for then the property will have been correctly stated in this
respect. Thus (e.g.) seeing that 'man' is used in a single sense,
'naturally civilized animal' would be correctly stated as a property
of man. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether the same term has been
repeated in the property. For people often do this undetected in rendering
'properties' also, just as they do in their 'definitions' as well:
but a property to which this has happened will not have been correctly
stated: for the repetition of it confuses the hearer; thus inevitably
the meaning becomes obscure, and further, such people are thought
to babble. Repetition of the same term is likely to happen in two
ways; one is, when a man repeatedly uses the same word, as would happen
if any one were to render, as a property of fire, 'the body which
is the most rarefied of bodies' (for he has repeated the word 'body');
the second is, if a man replaces words by their definitions, as would
happen if any one were to render, as a property of earth, 'the substance
which is by its nature most easily of all bodies borne downwards in
space', and were then to substitute 'substances of such and such a
kind' for the word 'bodies': for 'body' and 'a substance of such and
such a kind' mean one and the same thing. For he will have repeated
the word 'substance', and accordingly neither of the properties would
be correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,
see whether he avoids ever repeating the same term; for then the property
will in this respect have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) seeing
that he who has stated 'animal capable of acquiring knowledge' as
a property of man has avoided repeating the same term several times,
the property would in this respect have been correctly rendered of
man. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered in the
property any such term as is a universal attribute. For one which
does not distinguish its subject from other things is useless, and
it is the business of the language Of 'properties', as also of the
language of definitions, to distinguish. In the case contemplated,
therefore, the property will not have been correctly rendered. Thus
(e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of knowledge to
be a 'conception incontrovertible by argument, because of its unity',
has used in the property a term of that kind, viz. 'unity', which
is a universal attribute; and therefore the property of knowledge
could not have been correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on
the other hand, see whether he has avoided all terms that are common
to everything and used a term that distinguishes the subject from
something: for then the property will in this respect have been correctly
stated. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he who has said that it is a property
of a 'living creature' to 'have a soul' has used no term that is common
to everything, it would in this respect have been correctly stated
to be a property of a 'living creature' to 'have a soul'.

Next, for destructive purposes see whether he renders more than one
property of the same thing, without a definite proviso that he is
stating more than one: for then the property will not have been correctly
stated. For just as in the case of definitions too there should be
no further addition beside the expression which shows the essence,
so too in the case of properties nothing further should be rendered
beside the expression that constitutes the property mentioned: for
such an addition is made to no purpose. Thus (e.g.) a man who has
said that it is a property of fire to be 'the most rarefied and lightest
body' has rendered more than one property (for each term is a true
predicate of fire alone); and so it could not be a correctly stated
property of fire to be 'the most rarefied and lightest body'. On the
other hand, for constructive purposes, see whether he has avoided
rendering more than one property of the same thing, and has rendered
one only: for then the property will in this respect have been correctly
stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is a property of a
liquid to be a 'body adaptable to every shape' has rendered as its
property a single character and not several, and so the property of
'liquid' would in this respect have been correctly stated.

Part 3

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has employed either
the actual subject whose property he is rendering, or any of its species:
for then the property will not have been correctly stated. For the
object of rendering the property is that people may understand: now
the subject itself is just as unintelligible as it was to start with,
while any one of its species is posterior to it, and so is no more
intelligible. Accordingly it is impossible to understand anything
further by the use of these terms. Thus (e.g.) any one who has said
that it is property of 'animal' to be 'the substance to which "man"
belongs as a species' has employed one of its species, and therefore
the property could not have been correctly stated. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see whether he avoids introducing either
the subject itself or any of its species: for then the property will
in this respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who
has stated that it is a property of a living creature to be 'compounded
of soul and body' has avoided introducing among the rest either the
subject itself or any of its species, and therefore in this respect
the property of a 'living creature' would have been correctly rendered.

You should inquire in the same way also in the case of other terms
that do or do not make the subject more intelligible: thus, for destructive
purposes, see whether he has employed anything either opposite to
the subject or, in general, anything simultaneous by nature with it
or posterior to it: for then the property will not have been correctly
stated. For an opposite is simultaneous by nature with its opposite,
and what is simultaneous by nature or is posterior to it does not
make its subject more intelligible. Thus (e.g.) any one who has said
that it is a property of good to be 'the most direct opposite of evil',
has employed the opposite of good, and so the property of good could
not have been correctly rendered. For constructive purposes, on the
other hand, see whether he has avoided employing anything either opposite
to, or, in general, simultaneous by nature with the subject, or posterior
to it: for then the property will in this respect have been correctly
rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of
knowledge to be 'the most convincing conception' has avoided employing
anything either opposite to, or simultaneous by nature with, or posterior
to, the subject; and so the property of knowledge would in this respect
have been correctly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered as property
something that does not always follow the subject but sometimes ceases
to be its property: for then the property will not have been correctly
described. For there is no necessity either that the name of the subject
must also be true of anything to which we find such an attribute belonging;
nor yet that the name of the subject will be untrue of anything to
which such an attribute is found not to belong. Moreover, in addition
to this, even after he has rendered the property it will not be clear
whether it belongs, seeing that it is the kind of attribute that may
fall: and so the property will not be clear. Thus (e.g.) a man who
has stated that it is a property of animal 'sometimes to move and
sometimes to stand still' rendered the kind of property which sometimes
is not a property, and so the property could not have been correctly
stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see whether
he has rendered something that of necessity must always be a property:
for then the property will have been in this respect correctly stated.
Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of virtue to
be 'what makes its possessor good' has rendered as property something
that always follows, and so the property of virtue would in this respect
have been correctly rendered. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether in rendering the property
of the present time he has omitted to make a definite proviso that
it is the property of the present time which he is rendering: for
else the property will not have been correctly stated. For in the
first place, any unusual procedure always needs a definite proviso:
and it is the usual procedure for everybody to render as property
some attribute that always follows. In the second place, a man who
omits to provide definitely whether it was the property of the present
time which he intended to state, is obscure: and one should not give
any occasion for adverse criticism. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated
it as the property of a particular man 'to be sitting with a particular
man', states the property of the present time, and so he cannot have
rendered the property correctly, seeing that he has described it without
any definite proviso. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,
see whether, in rendering the property of the present time, he has,
in stating it, made a definite proviso that it is the property of
the present time that he is stating: for then the property will in
this respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has
said that it is the property of a particular man 'to be walking now',
has made this distinction in his statement, and so the property would
have been correctly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered a property
of the kind whose appropriateness is not obvious except by sensation:
for then the property will not have been correctly stated. For every
sensible attribute, once it is taken beyond the sphere of sensation,
becomes uncertain. For it is not clear whether it still belongs, because
it is evidenced only by sensation. This principle will be true in
the case of any attributes that do not always and necessarily follow.
Thus (e.g.) any one who has stated that it is a property of the sun
to be 'the brightest star that moves over the earth', has used in
describing the property an expression of that kind, viz. 'to move
over the earth', which is evidenced by sensation; and so the sun's
property could not have been correctly rendered: for it will be uncertain,
whenever the sun sets, whether it continues to move over the earth,
because sensation then fails us. For constructive purposes, on the
other hand, see whether he has rendered the property of a kind that
is not obvious to sensation, or, if it be sensible, must clearly belong
of necessity: for then the property will in this respect have been
correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property
of a surface to be 'the primary thing that is coloured', has introduced
amongst the rest a sensible quality, 'to be coloured', but still a
quality such as manifestly always belongs, and so the property of
'surface' would in this respect have been correctly rendered.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the definition
as a property: for then the property will not have been correctly
stated: for the property of a thing ought not to show its essence.
Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is the property of man to be
'a walking, biped animal' has rendered a property of man so as to
signify his essence, and so the property of man could not have been
correctly rendered. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,
see whether the property which he has rendered forms a predicate convertible
with its subject, without, however, signifying its essence: for then
the property will in this respect have been correctly rendered. Thus
(e.g.) he who has stated that it is a property of man to be a 'naturally
civilized animal' has rendered the property so as to be convertible
with its subject, without, however, showing its essence, and so the
property of man' would in this respect have been correctly rendered.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the property
without having placed the subject within its essence. For of properties,
as also of definitions, the first term to be rendered should be the
genus, and then the rest of it should be appended immediately afterwards,
and should distinguish its subject from other things. Hence a property
which is not stated in this way could not have been correctly rendered.
Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is a property of a living creature
to 'have a soul' has not placed 'living creature' within its essence,
and so the property of a living creature could not have been correctly
stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see whether
a man first places within its essence the subject whose property he
is rendering, and then appends the rest: for then the property will
in this respect have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) he who has
stated that is a property of man to be an 'animal capable of receiving
knowledge', has rendered the property after placing the subject within
its essence, and so the property of 'man' would in this respect have
been correctly rendered. 

Part 4

The inquiry, then, whether the property has been correctly rendered
or no, should be made by these means. The question, on the other hand,
whether what is stated is or is not a property at all, you should
examine from the following points of view. For the commonplace arguments
which establish absolutely that the property is accurately stated
will be the same as those that constitute it a property at all: accordingly
they will be described in the course of them. 

Firstly, then, for destructive purposes, take a look at each subject
of which he has rendered the property, and see (e.g.) if it fails
to belong to any of them at all, or to be true of them in that particular
respect, or to be a property of each of them in respect of that character
of which he has rendered the property: for then what is stated to
be a property will not be a property. Thus, for example, inasmuch
as it is not true of the geometrician that he 'cannot be deceived
by an argument' (for a geometrician is deceived when his figure is
misdrawn), it could not be a property of the man of science that he
is not deceived by an argument. For constructive purposes, on the
other hand, see whether the property rendered be true of every instance,
and true in that particular respect: for then what is stated not to
be a property will be a property. Thus, for example, in as much as
the description 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' is true
of every man, and true of him qua man, it would be a property of man
to be 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge'. commonplace rule
means-for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to be
true of that of which the name is true; and if the name fails to be
true of that of which the description is true: for constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if the description too is predicated of that
of which the name is predicated, and if the name too is predicated
of that of which the description is predicated.] 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to apply
to that to which the name applies, and if the name fails to apply
to that to which the description applies: for then what is stated
to be a property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the
description 'a living being that partakes of knowledge' is true of
God, while 'man' is not predicated of God, to be a living being that
partakes of knowledge' could not be a property of man. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if the name as well be predicated
of that of which the description is predicated, and if the description
as well be predicated of that of which the name is predicated. For
then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) the predicate 'living creature' is true of that of which 'having
a soul' is true, and 'having a soul' is true of that of which the
predicate 'living creature' is true; and so 'having a soul would be
a property of 'living creature'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered a subject as
a property of that which is described as 'in the subject': for then
what has been stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus
(e.g.) inasmuch as he who has rendered 'fire' as the property of 'the
body with the most rarefied particles', has rendered the subject as
the property of its predicate, 'fire' could not be a property of 'the
body with the most rarefied particles'. The reason why the subject
will not be a property of that which is found in the subject is this,
that then the same thing will be the property of a number of things
that are specifically different. For the same thing has quite a number
of specifically different predicates that belong to it alone, and
the subject will be a property of all of these, if any one states
the property in this way. For constructive purposes, on the other
hand, see if he has rendered what is found in the subject as a property
of the subject: for then what has been stated not to be a property
will be a property, if it be predicated only of the things of which
it has been stated to be the property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said
that it is a property of 'earth' to be 'specifically the heaviest
body' has rendered of the subject as its property something that is
said of the thing in question alone, and is said of it in the manner
in which a property is predicated, and so the property of earth would
have been rightly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered the property
as partaken of: for then what is stated to be a property will not
be a property. For an attribute of which the subject partakes is a
constituent part of its essence: and an attribute of that kind would
be a differentia applying to some one species. E.g. inasmuch as he
who has said that 'walking on two feet' is property of man has rendered
the property as partaken of, 'walking on two feet' could not be a
property of 'man'. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see
if he has avoided rendering the property as partaken of, or as showing
the essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly with it:
for then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) he who has stated that to be 'naturally sentient' is a property
of 'animal' has rendered the property neither as partaken of nor as
showing the essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly
with it; and so to be 'naturally sentient' would be a property of
'animal'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property cannot possibly
belong simultaneously, but must belong either as posterior or as prior
to the attribute described in the name: for then what is stated to
be a property will not be a property either never, or not always.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is possible for the attribute 'walking
through the market-place' to belong to an object as prior and as posterior
to the attribute 'man', 'walking through the market-place' could not
be a property of 'man' either never, or not always. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if it always and of necessity belongs
simultaneously, without being either a definition or a differentia:
for then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) the attribute 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' always
and of necessity belongs simultaneously with the attribute 'man',
and is neither differentia nor definition of its subject, and so 'an
animal capable of receiving knowledge' would be a property of 'man'.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the same thing fails to be
a property of things that are the same as the subject, so far as they
are the same: for then what is stated to be a property will not be
a property. Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is no property of a
'proper object of pursuit' to 'appear good to certain persons', it
could not be a property of the 'desirable' either to 'appear good
to certain persons': for 'proper object of pursuit' and 'desirable'
mean the same. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if
the same thing be a property of something that is the same as the
subject, in so far as it is the same. For then is stated not to be
a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is called
a property of a man, in so far as he is a man, 'to have a tripartite
soul', it would also be a property of a mortal, in so far as he is
a mortal, to have a tripartite soul. This commonplace rule is useful
also in dealing with Accident: for the same attributes ought either
to belong or not belong to the same things, in so far as they are
the same. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property of things that
are the same in kind as the subject fails to be always the same in
kind as the alleged property: for then neither will what is stated
to be the property of the subject in question. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch
as a man and a horse are the same in kind, and it is not always a
property of a horse to stand by its own initiative, it could not be
a property of a man to move by his own initiative; for to stand and
to move by his own initiative are the same in kind, because they belong
to each of them in so far as each is an 'animal'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if of things that are the same in
kind as the subject the property that is the same as the alleged property
is always true: for then what is stated not to be a property will
be a property. Thus (e.g.) since it is a property of man to be a 'walking
biped,' it would also be a property of a bird to be a 'flying biped':
for each of these is the same in kind, in so far as the one pair have
the sameness of species that fall under the same genus, being under
the genus 'animal', while the other pair have that of differentiae
of the genus, viz. of 'animal'. This commonplace rule is deceptive
whenever one of the properties mentioned belongs to some one species
only while the other belongs to many, as does 'walking quadruped'.

Inasmuch as 'same' and 'different' are terms used in several senses,
it is a job to render to a sophistical questioner a property that
belongs to one thing and that only. For an attribute that belongs
to something qualified by an accident will also belong to the accident
taken along with the subject which it qualifies; e.g. an attribute
that belongs to 'man' will belong also to 'white man', if there be
a white man, and one that belongs to 'white man' will belong also
to 'man'. One might, then, bring captious criticism against the majority
of properties, by representing the subject as being one thing in itself,
and another thing when combined with its accident, saying, for example,
that 'man' is one thing, and white man' another, and moreover by representing
as different a certain state and what is called after that state.
For an attribute that belongs to the state will belong also to what
is called after that state, and one that belongs to what is called
after a state will belong also to the state: e.g. inasmuch as the
condition of the scientist is called after his science, it could not
be a property of 'science' that it is 'incontrovertible by argument';
for then the scientist also will be incontrovertible by argument.
For constructive purposes, however, you should say that the subject
of an accident is not absolutely different from the accident taken
along with its subject; though it is called 'another' thing because
the mode of being of the two is different: for it is not the same
thing for a man to be a man and for a white man to be a white man.
Moreover, you should take a look along at the inflections, and say
that the description of the man of science is wrong: one should say
not 'it' but 'he is incontrovertible by argument'; while the description
of Science is wrong too: one should say not 'it' but 'she is incontrovertible
by argument'. For against an objector who sticks at nothing the defence
should stick at nothing. 

Part 5

Next, for destructive purposes, see if, while intending to render
an attribute that naturally belongs, he states it in his language
in such a way as to indicate one that invariably belongs: for then
it would be generally agreed that what has been stated to be a property
is upset. Thus (e.g.) the man who has said that 'biped' is a property
of man intends to render the attribute that naturally belongs, but
his expression actually indicates one that invariably belongs: accordingly,
'biped' could not be a property of man: for not every man is possessed
of two feet. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if
he intends to render the property that naturally belongs, and indicates
it in that way in his language: for then the property will not be
upset in this respect. Thus (e.g.) he who renders as a property of
'man' the phrase 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' both intends,
and by his language indicates, the property that belongs by nature,
and so 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' would not be upset
or shown in that respect not to be a property of man. 

Moreover, as regards all the things that are called as they are primarily
after something else, or primarily in themselves, it is a job to render
the property of such things. For if you render a property as belonging
to the subject that is so called after something else, then it will
be true of its primary subject as well; whereas if you state it of
its primary subject, then it will be predicated also of the thing
that is so called after this other. Thus (e.g.) if any one renders
, coloured' as the property of 'surface', 'coloured' will be true
of body as well; whereas if he render it of 'body', it will be predicated
also of 'surface'. Hence the name as well will not be true of that
of which the description is true. 

In the case of some properties it mostly happens that some error is
incurred because of a failure to define how as well as to what things
the property is stated to belong. For every one tries to render as
the property of a thing something that belongs to it either naturally,
as 'biped' belongs to 'man', or actually, as 'having four fingers'
belongs to a particular man, or specifically, as 'consisting of most
rarefied particles' belongs to 'fire', or absolutely, as 'life' to
'living being', or one that belongs to a thing only as called after
something else, as 'wisdom' to the 'soul', or on the other hand primarily,
as 'wisdom' to the 'rational faculty', or because the thing is in
a certain state, as 'incontrovertible by argument' belongs to a 'scientist'
(for simply and solely by reason of his being in a certain state will
he be 'incontrovertible by argument'), or because it is the state
possessed by something, as 'incontrovertible by argument' belongs
to 'science', or because it is partaken of, as 'sensation' belongs
to 'animal' (for other things as well have sensation, e.g. man, but
they have it because they already partake of 'animal'), or because
it partakes of something else, as 'life' belongs to a particular kind
of 'living being'. Accordingly he makes a mistake if he has failed
to add the word 'naturally', because what belongs naturally may fail
to belong to the thing to which it naturally belongs, as (e.g.) it
belongs to a man to have two feet: so too he errs if he does not make
a definite proviso that he is rendering what actually belongs, because
one day that attribute will not be what it now is, e.g. the man's
possession of four fingers. So he errs if he has not shown that he
states a thing to be such and such primarily, or that he calls it
so after something else, because then its name too will not be true
of that of which the description is true, as is the case with 'coloured',
whether rendered as a property of 'surface' or of 'body'. So he errs
if he has not said beforehand that he has rendered a property to a
thing either because that thing possesses a state, or because it is
a state possessed by something; because then it will not be a property.
For, supposing he renders the property to something as being a state
possessed, it will belong to what possesses that state; while supposing
he renders it to what possesses the state, it will belong to the state
possessed, as did 'incontrovertible by argument' when stated as a
property of 'science' or of the 'scientist'. So he errs if he has
not indicated beforehand that the property belongs because the thing
partakes of, or is partaken of by, something; because then the property
will belong to certain other things as well. For if he renders it
because its subject is partaken of, it will belong to the things which
partake of it; whereas if he renders it because its subject partakes
of something else, it will belong to the things partaken of, as (e.g.)
if he were to state 'life' to be a property of a 'particular kind
of living being', or just of 'living being. So he errs if he has not
expressly distinguished the property that belongs specifically, because
then it will belong only to one of the things that fall under the
term of which he states the property: for the superlative belongs
only to one of them, e.g. 'lightest' as applied to 'fire'. Sometimes,
too, a man may even add the word 'specifically', and still make a
mistake. For the things in question should all be of one species,
whenever the word 'specifically' is added: and in some cases this
does not occur, as it does not, in fact, in the case of fire. For
fire is not all of one species; for live coals and flame and light
are each of them 'fire', but are of different species. The reason
why, whenever 'specifically' is added, there should not be any species
other than the one mentioned, is this, that if there be, then the
property in question will belong to some of them in a greater and
to others in a less degree, as happens with 'consisting of most rarefied
particles' in the case of fire: for 'light' consists of more rarefied
particles than live coals and flame. And this should not happen unless
the name too be predicated in a greater degree of that of which the
description is truer; otherwise the rule that where the description
is truer the name too should be truer is not fulfilled. Moreover,
in addition to this, the same attribute will be the property both
of the term which has it absolutely and of that element therein which
has it in the highest degree, as is the condition of the property
'consisting of most rarefied particles' in the case of 'fire': for
this same attribute will be the property of 'light' as well: for it
is 'light' that 'consists of the most rarefied particles'. If, then,
any one else renders a property in this way one should attack it;
for oneself, one should not give occasion for this objection, but
should define in what manner one states the property at the actual
time of making the statement. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has stated a thing as a
property of itself: for then what has been stated to be a property
will not be a property. For a thing itself always shows its own essence,
and what shows the essence is not a property but a definition. Thus
(e.g.) he who has said that 'becoming' is a property of 'beautiful'
has rendered the term as a property of itself (for 'beautiful' and
'becoming' are the same); and so 'becoming' could not be a property
of 'beautiful'. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see
if he has avoided rendering a thing as a property of itself, but has
yet stated a convertible predicate: for then what is stated not to
be a property will be a property. Thus he who has stated 'animate
substance' as a property of 'living-creature' has not stated 'living-creature'
as a property of itself, but has rendered a convertible predicate,
so that 'animate substance' would be a property of 'living-creature'.

Next, in the case of things consisting of like parts, you should look
and see, for destructive purposes, if the property of the whole be
not true of the part, or if that of the part be not predicated of
the whole: for then what has been stated to be the property will not
be a property. In some cases it happens that this is so: for sometimes
in rendering a property in the case of things that consist of like
parts a man may have his eye on the whole, while sometimes he may
address himself to what is predicated of the part: and then in neither
case will it have been rightly rendered. Take an instance referring
to the whole: the man who has said that it is a property of the 'sea'
to be 'the largest volume of salt water', has stated the property
of something that consists of like parts, but has rendered an attribute
of such a kind as is not true of the part (for a particular sea is
not 'the largest volume of salt water'); and so the largest volume
of salt water' could not be a property of the 'sea'. Now take one
referring to the part: the man who has stated that it is a property
of 'air' to be 'breathable' has stated the property of something that
consists of like parts, but he has stated an attribute such as, though
true of some air, is still not predicable of the whole (for the whole
of the air is not breathable); and so 'breathable' could not be a
property of 'air'. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see
whether, while it is true of each of the things with similar parts,
it is on the other hand a property of them taken as a collective whole:
for then what has been stated not to be a property will be a property.
Thus (e.g.) while it is true of earth everywhere that it naturally
falls downwards, it is a property of the various particular pieces
of earth taken as 'the Earth', so that it would be a property of 'earth'
'naturally to fall downwards'. 

Part 6

Next, look from the point of view of the respective opposites, and
first (a) from that of the contraries, and see, for destructive purposes,
if the contrary of the term rendered fails to be a property of the
contrary subject. For then neither will the contrary of the first
be a property of the contrary of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch
as injustice is contrary to justice, and the lowest evil to the highest
good, but 'to be the highest good' is not a property of 'justice',
therefore 'to be the lowest evil' could not be a property of 'injustice'.
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the contrary
is the property of the contrary: for then also the contrary of the
first will be the property of the contrary of the second. Thus (e.g.)
inasmuch as evil is contrary to good, and objectionable to desirable,
and 'desirable' is a property of 'good', 'objectionable' would be
a property of 'evil'. 

Secondly (h) look from the point of view of relative opposites and
see, for destructive purposes, if the correlative of the term rendered
fails to be a property of the correlative of the subject: for then
neither will the correlative of the first be a property of the correlative
of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'double' is relative to 'half',
and 'in excess' to 'exceeded', while 'in excess' is not a property
of 'double', exceeded' could not be a property of 'half'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if the correlative of the alleged
property is a property of the subject's correlative: for then also
the correlative of the first will be a property of the correlative
of the second: e.g. inasmuch as 'double' is relative to 'half', and
the proportion 1:2 is relative to the proportion 2:1, while it is
a property of 'double' to be 'in the proportion of 2 to 1', it would
be a property of 'half' to be 'in the proportion of 1 to 2'.

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if an attribute described
in terms of a state (X) fails to be a property of the given state
(Y): for then neither will the attribute described in terms of the
privation (of X) be a property of the privation (of Y). Also if, on
the other hand, an attribute described in terms of the privation (of
X) be not a property of the given privation (of Y), neither will the
attribute described in terms of the state (X) be a property of the
state (Y). Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is not predicated as
a property of 'deafness' to be a 'lack of sensation', neither could
it be a property of 'hearing' to be a 'sensation'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if an attribute described in terms
of a state (X) is a property of the given state (Y): for then also
the attribute that is described in terms of the privation (of X) will
be a property of the privation (of Y). Also, if an attribute described
in terms of a privation (of X) be a property of the privation (of
Y), then also the attribute that is described in terms of the state
(X) will be a property of the state (Y). Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'to
see' is a property of 'sight', inasmuch as we have sight, 'failure
to see' would be a property of 'blindness', inasmuch as we have not
got the sight we should naturally have. 

Next, look from the point of view of positive and negative terms;
and first (a) from the point of view of the predicates taken by themselves.
This common-place rule is useful only for a destructive purpose. Thus
(e.g.) see if the positive term or the attribute described in terms
of it is a property of the subject: for then the negative term or
the attribute described in terms of it will not be a property of the
subject. Also if, on the other hand, the negative term or the attribute
described in terms of it is a property of the subject, then the positive
term or the attribute described in terms of it will not be a property
of the subject: e.g. inasmuch as 'animate' is a property of 'living
creature', 'inanimate' could not be a property of 'living creature'.

Secondly (b) look from the point of view of the predicates, positive
or negative, and their respective subjects; and see, for destructive
purposes, if the positive term falls to be a property of the positive
subject: for then neither will the negative term be a property of
the negative subject. Also, if the negative term fails to be a property
of the negative subject, neither will the positive term be a property
of the positive subject. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'animal' is not a
property of 'man', neither could 'not-animal' be a property of 'not-man'.
Also if 'not-animal' seems not to be a property of 'not-man', neither
will 'animal' be a property of 'man'. For constructive purposes, on
the other hand, see if the positive term is a property of the positive
subject: for then the negative term will be a property of the negative
subject as well. Also if the negative term be a property of the negative
subject, the positive will be a property of the positive as well.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is a property of 'not-living being' 'not
to live', it would be a property of 'living being' 'to live': also
if it seems to be a property of 'living being' 'to live', it will
also seem to be a property of 'not-living being' 'not to live'.

Thirdly (c) look from the point of view of the subjects taken by themselves,
and see, for destructive purposes, if the property rendered is a property
of the positive subject: for then the same term will not be a property
of the negative subject as well. Also, if the term rendered be a property
of the negative subject, it will not be a property of the positive.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'animate' is a property of 'living creature',
'animate' could not be a property of 'not-living creature'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, if the term rendered fails to be a property
of the affirmative subject it would be a property of the negative.
This commonplace rule is, however, deceptive: for a positive term
is not a property of a negative, or a negative of a positive. For
a positive term does not belong at all to a negative, while a negative
term, though it belongs to a positive, does not belong as a property.

Next, look from the point of view of the coordinate members of a division,
and see, for destructive purposes, if none of the co-ordinate members
(parallel with the property rendered) be a property of any of the
remaining set of co-ordinate members (parallel with the subject):
for then neither will the term stated be a property of that of which
it is stated to be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'sensible living
being' is not a property of any of the other living beings, 'intelligible
living being' could not be a property of God. For constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if some one or other of the remaining co-ordinate
members (parallel with the property rendered) be a property of each
of these co-ordinate members (parallel with the subject): for then
the remaining one too will be a property of that of which it has been
stated not to be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is a property
of 'wisdom' to be essentially 'the natural virtue of the rational
faculty', then, taking each of the other virtues as well in this way,
it would be a property of 'temperance' to be essentially 'the natural
virtue of the faculty of desire'. 

Next, look from the point of view of the inflexions, and see, for
destructive purposes, if the inflexion of the property rendered fails
to be a property of the inflexion of the subject: for then neither
will the other inflexion be a property of the other inflexion. Thus
(e.g.) inasmuch as 'beautifully' is not a property of 'justly', neither
could 'beautiful' be a property of 'just'. For constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if the inflexion of the property rendered is
a property of the inflexion of the subject: for then also the other
inflexion will be a property of the other inflexion. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch
as 'walking biped' is a property of man, it would also be any one's
property 'as a man' to be described 'as a walking biped'. Not only
in the case of the actual term mentioned should one look at the inflexions,
but also in the case of its opposites, just as has been laid down
in the case of the former commonplace rules as well.' Thus, for destructive
purposes, see if the inflexion of the opposite of the property rendered
fails to be the property of the inflexion of the opposite of the subject:
for then neither will the inflexion of the other opposite be a property
of the inflexion of the other opposite. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'well'
is not a property of 'justly', neither could 'badly' be a property
of 'unjustly'. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if
the inflexion of the opposite of the property originally suggested
is a property of the inflexion of the opposite of the original subject:
for then also the inflexion of the other opposite will be a property
of the inflexion of the other opposite. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'best'
is a property of 'the good', 'worst' also will be a property of 'the
evil'. 

Part 7

Next, look from the point of view of things that are in a like relation,
and see, for destructive purposes, if what is in a relation like that
of the property rendered fails to be a property of what is in a relation
like that of the subject: for then neither will what is in a relation
like that of the first be a property of what is in a relation like
that of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the relation of the builder
towards the production of a house is like that of the doctor towards
the production of health, and it is not a property of a doctor to
produce health, it could not be a property of a builder to produce
a house. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what
is in a relation like that of the property rendered is a property
of what is in a relation like that of the subject: for then also what
is in a relation like that of the first will be a property of what
is in a relation like that of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as
the relation of a doctor towards the possession of ability to produce
health is like that of a trainer towards the possession of ability
to produce vigour, and it is a property of a trainer to possess the
ability to produce vigour, it would be a property of a doctor to possess
the ability to produce health. 

Next look from the point of view of things that are identically related,
and see, for destructive purposes, if the predicate that is identically
related towards two subjects fails to be a property of the subject
which is identically related to it as the subject in question; for
then neither will the predicate that is identically related to both
subjects be a property of the subject which is identically related
to it as the first. If, on the other hand, the predicate which is
identically related to two subjects is the property of the subject
which is identically related to it as the subject in question, then
it will not be a property of that of which it has been stated to be
a property. (e.g.) inasmuch as prudence is identically related to
both the noble and the base, since it is knowledge of each of them,
and it is not a property of prudence to be knowledge of the noble,
it could not be a property of prudence to be knowledge of the base.
If, on the other hand, it is a property of prudence to be the knowledge
of the noble, it could not be a property of it to be the knowledge
of the base.] For it is impossible for the same thing to be a property
of more than one subject. For constructive purposes, on the other
hand, this commonplace rule is of no use: for what is 'identically
related' is a single predicate in process of comparison with more
than one subject. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the predicate qualified by
the verb 'to be' fails to be a property of the subject qualified by
the verb 'to be': for then neither will the destruction of the one
be a property of the other qualified by the verb 'to be destroyed',
nor will the 'becoming'the one be a property of the other qualified
by the verb 'to become'. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is not a property
of 'man' to be an animal, neither could it be a property of becoming
a man to become an animal; nor could the destruction of an animal
be a property of the destruction of a man. In the same way one should
derive arguments also from 'becoming' to 'being' and 'being destroyed',
and from 'being destroyed' to 'being' and to 'becoming' exactly as
they have just been given from 'being' to 'becoming' and 'being destroyed'.
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the subject set
down as qualified by the verb 'to be' has the predicate set down as
so qualified, as its property: for then also the subject qualified
by the very 'to become' will have the predicate qualified by 'to become'
as its property, and the subject qualified by the verb to be destroyed'
will have as its property the predicate rendered with this qualification.
Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is a property of man to be a mortal,
it would be a property of becoming a man to become a mortal, and the
destruction of a mortal would be a property of the destruction of
a man. In the same way one should derive arguments also from 'becoming'
and 'being destroyed' both to 'being' and to the conclusions that
follow from them, exactly as was directed also for the purpose of
destruction. 

Next take a look at the 'idea' of the subject stated, and see, for
destructive purposes, if the suggested property fails to belong to
the 'idea' in question, or fails to belong to it in virtue of that
character which causes it to bear the description of which the property
was rendered: for then what has been stated to be a property will
not be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'being motionless' does
not belong to 'man-himself' qua 'man', but qua 'idea', it could not
be a property of 'man' to be motionless. For constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if the property in question belongs to the
idea, and belongs to it in that respect in virtue of which there is
predicated of it that character of which the predicate in question
has been stated not to be a property: for then what has been stated
not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it
belongs to 'living-creature-itself' to be compounded of soul and body,
and further this belongs to it qua 'living-creature', it would be
a property of 'living-creature' to be compounded of soul and body.

Part 8

Next look from the point of view of greater and less degrees, and
first (a) for destructive purposes, see if what is more-P fails to
be a property of what is more-S: for then neither will what is less-P
be a property of what is less-S, nor least-P of least-S, nor most-P
of most-S, nor P simply of S simply. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as being
more highly coloured is not a property of what is more a body, neither
could being less highly coloured be a property of what is less a body,
nor being coloured be a property of body at all. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if what is more-P is a property of
what is more-S: for then also what is less-P will be a property of
what is less S, and least-P of least-S, and most-P of most-S, and
P simply of S simply. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as a higher degree of sensation
is a property of a higher degree of life, a lower degree of sensation
also would be a property of a lower degree of life, and the highest
of the highest and the lowest of the lowest degree, and sensation
simply of life simply. 

Also you should look at the argument from a simple predication to
the same qualified types of predication, and see, for destructive
purposes, if P simply fails to be a property of S simply; for then
neither will more-P be a property of more-S, nor less-P of less-S,
nor most-P of most-S, nor least-P of least-S. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch
as 'virtuous' is not a property of 'man', neither could 'more virtuous'
be a property of what is 'more human'. For constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if P simply is a property of S simply: for
then more P also will be a property of more-S, and less-P of less-S,
and least-P of least-S, and most-P of most-S. Thus (e.g.) a tendency
to move upwards by nature is a property of fire, and so also a greater
tendency to move upwards by nature would be a property of what is
more fiery. In the same way too one should look at all these matters
from the point of view of the others as well. 

Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if the more likely property
fails to be a property of the more likely subject: for then neither
will the less likely property be a property of the less likely subject.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'perceiving' is more likely to be a property
of 'animal' than 'knowing' of 'man', and 'perceiving' is not a property
of 'animal', 'knowing' could not be a property of 'man'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if the less likely property is a
property of the less likely subject; for then too the more likely
property will be a property of the more likely subject. Thus (e.g.)
inasmuch as 'to be naturally civilized' is less likely to be a property
of man than 'to live' of an animal, and it is a property of man to
be naturally civilized, it would be a property of animal to live.

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if the predicate fails to
be a property of that of which it is more likely to be a property:
for then neither will it be a property of that of which it is less
likely to be a property: while if it is a property of the former,
it will not be a property of the latter. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'to
be coloured' is more likely to be a property of a 'surface' than of
a 'body', and it is not a property of a surface, 'to be coloured'
could not be a property of 'body'; while if it is a property of a
'surface', it could not be a property of a 'body'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, this commonplace rule is not of any use:
for it is impossible for the same thing to be a property of more than
one thing. 

Fourthly (d) for destructive purposes, see if what is more likely
to be a property of a given subject fails to be its property: for
then neither will what is less likely to be a property of it be its
property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'sensible' is more likely than 'divisible'
to be a property of 'animal', and 'sensible' is not a property of
animal, 'divisible' could not be a property of animal. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if what is less likely to be a property
of it is a property; for then what is more likely to be a property
of it will be a property as well. Thus, for example, inasmuch as 'sensation'
is less likely to be a property of 'animal' than life', and 'sensation'
is a property of animal, 'life' would be a property of animal.

Next, look from the point of view of the attributes that belong in
a like manner, and first (a) for destructive purposes, see if what
is as much a property fails to be a property of that of which it is
as much a property: for then neither will that which is as much a
property as it be a property of that of which it is as much a property.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'desiring' is as much a property of the faculty
of desire as reasoning' is a property of the faculty of reason, and
desiring is not a property of the faculty of desire, reasoning could
not be a property of the faculty of reason. For constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if what is as much a property is a property
of that of which it is as much a property: for then also what is as
much a property as it will be a property of that of which it is as
much a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is as much a property
of 'the faculty of reason' to be 'the primary seat of wisdom' as it
is of 'the faculty of desire' to be 'the primary seat of temperance',
and it is a property of the faculty of reason to be the primary seat
of wisdom, it would be a property of the faculty of desire to be the
primary seat of temperance. 

Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if what is as much a property
of anything fails to be a property of it: for then neither will what
is as much a property be a property of it. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as
'seeing' is as much a property of man as 'hearing', and 'seeing' is
not a property of man, 'hearing' could not be a property of man. For
constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is as much a
property of it is its property: for then what is as much a property
of it as the former will be its property as well. Thus (e.g.) it is
as much a property of the soul to be the primary possessor of a part
that desires as of a part that reasons, and it is a property of the
soul to be the primary possessor of a part that desires, and so it
be a property of the soul to be the primary possessor of a part that
reasons. 

Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if it fails to be a property
of that of which it is as much a property: for then neither will it
be a property of that of which it is as much a property as of the
former, while if it be a property of the former, it will not be a
property of the other. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as 'to burn' is as much
a property of 'flame' as of 'live coals', and 'to burn' is not a property
of flame, 'to burn' could not be a property of live coals: while if
it is a property of flame, it could not be a property of live coals.
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, this commonplace rule
is of no use. 

The rule based on things that are in a like relation' differs from
the rule based on attributes that belong in a like manner,' because
the former point is secured by analogy, not from reflection on the
belonging of any attribute, while the latter is judged by a comparison
based on the fact that an attribute belongs. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if in rendering the property potentially,
he has also through that potentiality rendered the property relatively
to something that does not exist, when the potentiality in question
cannot belong to what does not exist: for then what is stated to be
a property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said that
'breathable' is a property of 'air' has, on the one hand, rendered
the property potentially (for that is 'breathable' which is such as
can be breathed), and on the other hand has also rendered the property
relatively to what does not exist:-for while air may exist, even though
there exist no animal so constituted as to breathe the air, it is
not possible to breathe it if no animal exist: so that it will not,
either, be a property of air to be such as can be breathed at a time
when there exists no animal such as to breathe it and so it follows
that 'breathable' could not be a property of air. 

For constructive purposes, see if in rendering the property potentially
he renders the property either relatively to something that exists,
or to something that does not exist, when the potentiality in question
can belong to what does not exist: for then what has been stated not
to be a property will be a property. Thus e.g.) he who renders it
as a property of 'being' to be 'capable of being acted upon or of
acting', in rendering the property potentially, has rendered the property
relatively to something that exists: for when 'being' exists, it will
also be capable of being acted upon or of acting in a certain way:
so that to be 'capable of being acted upon or of acting' would be
a property of 'being'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has stated the property
in the superlative: for then what has been stated to be a property
will not be a property. For people who render the property in that
way find that of the object of which the description is true, the
name is not true as well: for though the object perish the description
will continue in being none the less; for it belongs most nearly to
something that is in being. An example would be supposing any one
were to render 'the lightest body' as a property of 'fire': for, though
fire perish, there eh re will still be some form of body that is the
lightest, so that 'the lightest body' could not be a property of fire.
For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has avoided
rendering the property in the superlative: for then the property will
in this respect have been property of man has not rendered the property
correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he in the superlative, the
property would in who states 'a naturally civilized animal' as a this
respect have been correctly stated. 

 

BOOK VI

Part 1 

The discussion of Definitions falls into five parts. For you have
to show either (1) that it is not true at all to apply the expression
as well to that to which the term is applied (for the definition of
Man ought to be true of every man); or (2) that though the object
has a genus, he has failed to put the object defined into the genus,
or to put it into the appropriate genus (for the framer of a definition
should first place the object in its genus, and then append its differences:
for of all the elements of the definition the genus is usually supposed
to be the principal mark of the essence of what is defined): or (3)
that the expression is not peculiar to the object (for, as we said
above as well, a definition ought to be peculiar): or else (4) see
if, though he has observed all the aforesaid cautions, he has yet
failed to define the object, that is, to express its essence. (5)
It remains, apart from the foregoing, to see if he has defined it,
but defined it incorrectly. 

Whether, then, the expression be not also true of that of which the
term is true you should proceed to examine according to the commonplace
rules that relate to Accident. For there too the question is always
'Is so and so true or untrue?': for whenever we argue that an accident
belongs, we declare it to be true, while whenever we argue that it
does not belong, we declare it to be untrue. If, again, he has failed
to place the object in the appropriate genus, or if the expression
be not peculiar to the object, we must go on to examine the case according
to the commonplace rules that relate to genus and property.

It remains, then, to prescribe how to investigate whether the object
has been either not defined at all, or else defined incorrectly. First,
then, we must proceed to examine if it has been defined incorrectly:
for with anything it is easier to do it than to do it correctly. Clearly,
then, more mistakes are made in the latter task on account of its
greater difficulty. Accordingly the attack becomes easier in the latter
case than in the former. 

Incorrectness falls into two branches: (1) first, the use of obscure
language (for the language of a definition ought to be the very clearest
possible, seeing that the whole purpose of rendering it is to make
something known); (secondly, if the expression used be longer than
is necessary: for all additional matter in a definition is superfluous.
Again, each of the aforesaid branches is divided into a number of
others. 

Part 2

One commonplace rule, then, in regard to obscurity is, See if the
meaning intended by the definition involves an ambiguity with any
other, e.g. 'Becoming is a passage into being', or 'Health is the
balance of hot and cold elements'. Here 'passage' and 'balance' are
ambiguous terms: it is accordingly not clear which of the several
possible senses of the term he intends to convey. Likewise also, if
the term defined be used in different senses and he has spoken without
distinguishing between them: for then it is not clear to which of
them the definition rendered applies, and one can then bring a captious
objection on the ground that the definition does not apply to all
the things whose definition he has rendered: and this kind of thing
is particularly easy in the case where the definer does not see the
ambiguity of his terms. Or, again, the questioner may himself distinguish
the various senses of the term rendered in the definition, and then
institute his argument against each: for if the expression used be
not adequate to the subject in any of its senses, it is clear that
he cannot have defined it in any sense aright. 

Another rule is, See if he has used a metaphorical expression, as,
for instance, if he has defined knowledge as 'unsupplantable', or
the earth as a 'nurse', or temperance as a 'harmony'. For a metaphorical
expression is always obscure. It is possible, also, to argue sophistically
against the user of a metaphorical expression as though he had used
it in its literal sense: for the definition stated will not apply
to the term defined, e.g. in the case of temperance: for harmony is
always found between notes. Moreover, if harmony be the genus of temperance,
then the same object will occur in two genera of which neither contains
the other: for harmony does not contain virtue, nor virtue harmony.
Again, see if he uses terms that are unfamiliar, as when Plato describes
the eye as 'brow-shaded', or a certain spider as poison-fanged', or
the marrow as 'boneformed'. For an unusual phrase is always obscure.

Sometimes a phrase is used neither ambiguously, nor yet metaphorically,
nor yet literally, as when the law is said to be the 'measure' or
'image' of the things that are by nature just. Such phrases are worse
than metaphor; for the latter does make its meaning to some extent
clear because of the likeness involved; for those who use metaphors
do so always in view of some likeness: whereas this kind of phrase
makes nothing clear; for there is no likeness to justify the description
'measure' or 'image', as applied to the law, nor is the law ordinarily
so called in a literal sense. So then, if a man says that the law
is literally a 'measure' or an 'image', he speaks falsely: for an
image is something produced by imitation, and this is not found in
the case of the law. If, on the other hand, he does not mean the term
literally, it is clear that he has used an unclear expression, and
one that is worse than any sort of metaphorical expression.

Moreover, see if from the expression used the definition of the contrary
be not clear; for definitions that have been correctly rendered also
indicate their contraries as well. Or, again, see if, when it is merely
stated by itself, it is not evident what it defines: just as in the
works of the old painters, unless there were an inscription, the figures
used to be unrecognizable. 

Part 3

If, then, the definition be not clear, you should proceed to examine
on lines such as these. If, on the other hand, he has phrased the
definition redundantly, first of all look and see whether he has used
any attribute that belongs universally, either to real objects in
general, or to all that fall under the same genus as the object defined:
for the mention of this is sure to be redundant. For the genus ought
to divide the object from things in general, and the differentia from
any of the things contained in the same genus. Now any term that belongs
to everything separates off the given object from absolutely nothing,
while any that belongs to all the things that fall under the same
genus does not separate it off from the things contained in the same
genus. Any addition, then, of that kind will be pointless.

Or see if, though the additional matter may be peculiar to the given
term, yet even when it is struck out the rest of the expression too
is peculiar and makes clear the essence of the term. Thus, in the
definition of man, the addition 'capable of receiving knowledge' is
superfluous; for strike it out, and still the expression is peculiar
and makes clear his essence. Speaking generally, everything is superfluous
upon whose removal the remainder still makes the term that is being
defined clear. Such, for instance, would also be the definition of
the soul, assuming it to be stated as a 'self-moving number'; for
the soul is just 'the self-moving', as Plato defined it. Or perhaps
the expression used, though appropriate, yet does not declare the
essence, if the word 'number' be eliminated. Which of the two is the
real state of the case it is difficult to determine clearly: the right
way to treat the matter in all cases is to be guided by convenience.
Thus (e.g.) it is said that the definition of phlegm is the 'undigested
moisture that comes first off food'. Here the addition of the word
'undigested' is superfluous, seeing that 'the first' is one and not
many, so that even when undigested' is left out the definition will
still be peculiar to the subject: for it is impossible that both phlegm
and also something else should both be the first to arise from the
food. Or perhaps the phlegm is not absolutely the first thing to come
off the food, but only the first of the undigested matters, so that
the addition 'undigested' is required; for stated the other way the
definition would not be true unless the phlegm comes first of all.

Moreover, see if anything contained in the definition fails to apply
to everything that falls under the same species: for this sort of
definition is worse than those which include an attribute belonging
to all things universally. For in that case, if the remainder of the
expression be peculiar, the whole too will be peculiar: for absolutely
always, if to something peculiar anything whatever that is true be
added, the whole too becomes peculiar. Whereas if any part of the
expression do not apply to everything that falls under the same species,
it is impossible that the expression as a whole should be peculiar:
for it will not be predicated convertibly with the object; e.g. 'a
walking biped animal six feet high': for an expression of that kind
is not predicated convertibly with the term, because the attribute
'six feet high' does not belong to everything that falls under the
same species. 

Again, see if he has said the same thing more than once, saying (e.g.)
'desire' is a 'conation for the pleasant'. For 'desire' is always
'for the pleasant', so that what is the same as desire will also be
'for the pleasant'. Accordingly our definition of desire becomes 'conation-for-the-pleasant':
for the word 'desire' is the exact equivalent of the words 'conation
for-the-pleasant', so that both alike will be 'for the pleasant'.
Or perhaps there is no absurdity in this; for consider this instance:-Man
is a biped': therefore, what is the same as man is a biped: but 'a
walking biped animal' is the same as man, and therefore walking biped
animal is a biped'. But this involves no real absurdity. For 'biped'
is not a predicate of 'walking animal': if it were, then we should
certainly have 'biped' predicated twice of the same thing; but as
a matter of fact the subject said to be a biped is'a walking biped
animal', so that the word 'biped' is only used as a predicate once.
Likewise also in the case of 'desire' as well: for it is not 'conation'
that is said to be 'for the pleasant', but rather the whole idea,
so that there too the predication is only made once. Absurdity results,
not when the same word is uttered twice, but when the same thing is
more than once predicated of a subject; e.g. if he says, like Xenocrates,
that wisdom defines and contemplates reality:' for definition is a
certain type of contemplation, so that by adding the words 'and contemplates'
over again he says the same thing twice over. Likewise, too, those
fail who say that 'cooling' is 'the privation of natural heat'. For
all privation is a privation of some natural attribute, so that the
addition of the word 'natural' is superfluous: it would have been
enough to say 'privation of heat', for the word 'privation' shows
of itself that the heat meant is natural heat. 

Again, see if a universal have been mentioned and then a particular
case of it be added as well, e.g. 'Equity is a remission of what is
expedient and just'; for what is just is a branch of what is expedient
and is therefore included in the latter term: its mention is therefore
redundant, an addition of the particular after the universal has been
already stated. So also, if he defines 'medicine' as 'knowledge of
what makes for health in animals and men', or 'the law' as 'the image
of what is by nature noble and just'; for what is just is a branch
of what is noble, so that he says the same thing more than once.

Part 4

Whether, then, a man defines a thing correctly or incorrectly you
should proceed to examine on these and similar lines. But whether
he has mentioned and defined its essence or no, should be examined
as follows: First of all, see if he has failed to make the definition
through terms that are prior and more intelligible. For the reason
why the definition is rendered is to make known the term stated, and
we make things known by taking not any random terms, but such as are
prior and more intelligible, as is done in demonstrations (for so
it is with all teaching and learning); accordingly, it is clear that
a man who does not define through terms of this kind has not defined
at all. Otherwise, there will be more than one definition of the same
thing: for clearly he who defines through terms that are prior and
more intelligible has also framed a definition, and a better one,
so that both would then be definitions of the same object. This sort
of view, however, does not generally find acceptance: for of each
real object the essence is single: if, then, there are to be a number
of definitions of the same thing, the essence of the object will be
the same as it is represented to be in each of the definitions, and
these representations are not the same, inasmuch as the definitions
are different. Clearly, then, any one who has not defined a thing
through terms that are prior and more intelligible has not defined
it at all. 

The statement that a definition has not been made through more intelligible
terms may be understood in two senses, either supposing that its terms
are absolutely less intelligible, or supposing that they are less
intelligible to us: for either sense is possible. Thus absolutely
the prior is more intelligible than the posterior, a point, for instance,
than a line, a line than a plane, and a plane than a solid; just as
also a unit is more intelligible than a number; for it is the prius
and starting-point of all number. Likewise, also, a letter is more
intelligible than a syllable. Whereas to us it sometimes happens that
the converse is the case: for the solid falls under perception most
of all-more than a plane-and a plane more than a line, and a line
more than a point; for most people learn things like the former earlier
than the latter; for any ordinary intelligence can grasp them, whereas
the others require an exact and exceptional understanding.

Absolutely, then, it is better to try to make what is posterior known
through what is prior, inasmuch as such a way of procedure is more
scientific. Of course, in dealing with persons who cannot recognize
things through terms of that kind, it may perhaps be necessary to
frame the expression through terms that are intelligible to them.
Among definitions of this kind are those of a point, a line, and a
plane, all of which explain the prior by the posterior; for they say
that a point is the limit of a line, a line of a plane, a plane of
a solid. One must, however, not fail to observe that those who define
in this way cannot show the essential nature of the term they define,
unless it so happens that the same thing is more intelligible both
to us and also absolutely, since a correct definition must define
a thing through its genus and its differentiae, and these belong to
the order of things which are absolutely more intelligible than, and
prior to, the species. For annul the genus and differentia, and the
species too is annulled, so that these are prior to the species. They
are also more intelligible; for if the species be known, the genus
and differentia must of necessity be known as well (for any one who
knows what a man is knows also what 'animal' and 'walking' are), whereas
if the genus or the differentia be known it does not follow of necessity
that the species is known as well: thus the species is less intelligible.
Moreover, those who say that such definitions, viz. those which proceed
from what is intelligible to this, that, or the other man, are really
and truly definitions, will have to say that there are several definitions
of one and the same thing. For, as it happens, different things are
more intelligible to different people, not the same things to all;
and so a different definition would have to be rendered to each several
person, if the definition is to be constructed from what is more intelligible
to particular individuals. Moreover, to the same people different
things are more intelligible at different times; first of all the
objects of sense; then, as they become more sharpwitted, the converse;
so that those who hold that a definition ought to be rendered through
what is more intelligible to particular individuals would not have
to render the same definition at all times even to the same person.
It is clear, then, that the right way to define is not through terms
of that kind, but through what is absolutely more intelligible: for
only in this way could the definition come always to be one and the
same. Perhaps, also, what is absolutely intelligible is what is intelligible,
not to all, but to those who are in a sound state of understanding,
just as what is absolutely healthy is what is healthy to those in
a sound state of body. All such points as this ought to be made very
precise, and made use of in the course of discussion as occasion requires.
The demolition of a definition will most surely win a general approval
if the definer happens to have framed his expression neither from
what is absolutely more intelligible nor yet from what is so to us.

One form, then, of the failure to work through more intelligible terms
is the exhibition of the prior through the posterior, as we remarked
before.' Another form occurs if we find that the definition has been
rendered of what is at rest and definite through what is indefinite
and in motion: for what is still and definite is prior to what is
indefinite and in motion. 

Of the failure to use terms that are prior there are three forms:

(1) The first is when an opposite has been defined through its opposite,
e.g.i. good through evil: for opposites are always simultaneous by
nature. Some people think, also, that both are objects of the same
science, so that the one is not even more intelligible than the other.
One must, however, observe that it is perhaps not possible to define
some things in any other way, e.g. the double without the half, and
all the terms that are essentially relative: for in all such cases
the essential being is the same as a certain relation to something,
so that it is impossible to understand the one term without the other,
and accordingly in the definition of the one the other too must be
embraced. One ought to learn up all such points as these, and use
them as occasion may seem to require. 

(2) Another is-if he has used the term defined itself. This passes
unobserved when the actual name of the object is not used, e.g. supposing
any one had defined the sun as a star that appears by day'. For in
bringing in 'day' he brings in the sun. To detect errors of this sort,
exchange the word for its definition, e.g. the definition of 'day'
as the 'passage of the sun over the earth'. Clearly, whoever has said
'the passage of the sun over the earth' has said 'the sun', so that
in bringing in the 'day' he has brought in the sun. 

(3) Again, see if he has defined one coordinate member of a division
by another, e.g. 'an odd number' as 'that which is greater by one
than an even number'. For the co-ordinate members of a division that
are derived from the same genus are simultaneous by nature and 'odd'
and 'even' are such terms: for both are differentiae of number.

Likewise also, see if he has defined a superior through a subordinate
term, e.g. 'An "even number" is "a number divisible into halves"',
or '"the good" is a "state of virtue" '. For 'half' is derived from
'two', and 'two' is an even number: virtue also is a kind of good,
so that the latter terms are subordinate to the former. Moreover,
in using the subordinate term one is bound to use the other as well:
for whoever employs the term 'virtue' employs the term 'good', seeing
that virtue is a certain kind of good: likewise, also, whoever employs
the term 'half' employs the term 'even', for to be 'divided in half'
means to be divided into two, and two is even. 

Part 5

Generally speaking, then, one commonplace rule relates to the failure
to frame the expression by means of terms that are prior and more
intelligible: and of this the subdivisions are those specified above.
A second is, see whether, though the object is in a genus, it has
not been placed in a genus. This sort of error is always found where
the essence of the object does not stand first in the expression,
e.g. the definition of 'body' as 'that which has three dimensions',
or the definition of 'man', supposing any one to give it, as 'that
which knows how to count': for it is not stated what it is that has
three dimensions, or what it is that knows how to count: whereas the
genus is meant to indicate just this, and is submitted first of the
terms in the definition. 

Moreover, see if, while the term to be defined is used in relation
to many things, he has failed to render it in relation to all of them;
as (e.g.) if he define 'grammar' as the 'knowledge how to write from
dictation': for he ought also to say that it is a knowledge how to
read as well. For in rendering it as 'knowledge of writing' has no
more defined it than by rendering it as 'knowledge of reading': neither
in fact has succeeded, but only he who mentions both these things,
since it is impossible that there should be more than one definition
of the same thing. It is only, however, in some cases that what has
been said corresponds to the actual state of things: in some it does
not, e.g. all those terms which are not used essentially in relation
to both things: as medicine is said to deal with the production of
disease and health; for it is said essentially to do the latter, but
the former only by accident: for it is absolutely alien to medicine
to produce disease. Here, then, the man who renders medicine as relative
to both of these things has not defined it any better than he who
mentions the one only. In fact he has done it perhaps worse, for any
one else besides the doctor is capable of producing disease.

Moreover, in a case where the term to be defined is used in relation
to several things, see if he has rendered it as relative to the worse
rather than to the better; for every form of knowledge and potentiality
is generally thought to be relative to the best. 

Again, if the thing in question be not placed in its own proper genus,
one must examine it according to the elementary rules in regard to
genera, as has been said before.' 

Moreover, see if he uses language which transgresses the genera of
the things he defines, defining, e.g. justice as a 'state that produces
equality' or 'distributes what is equal': for by defining it so he
passes outside the sphere of virtue, and so by leaving out the genus
of justice he fails to express its essence: for the essence of a thing
must in each case bring in its genus. It is the same thing if the
object be not put into its nearest genus; for the man who puts it
into the nearest one has stated all the higher genera, seeing that
all the higher genera are predicated of the lower. Either, then, it
ought to be put into its nearest genus, or else to the higher genus
all the differentiae ought to be appended whereby the nearest genus
is defined. For then he would not have left out anything: but would
merely have mentioned the subordinate genus by an expression instead
of by name. On the other hand, he who mentions merely the higher genus
by itself, does not state the subordinate genus as well: in saying
'plant' a man does not specify 'a tree'. 

Part 6

Again, in regard to the differentiae, we must examine in like manner
whether the differentiae, too, that he has stated be those of the
genus. For if a man has not defined the object by the differentiae
peculiar to it, or has mentioned something such as is utterly incapable
of being a differentia of anything, e.g. 'animal' or 'substance',
clearly he has not defined it at all: for the aforesaid terms do not
differentiate anything at all. Further, we must see whether the differentia
stated possesses anything that is co-ordinate with it in a division;
for, if not, clearly the one stated could not be a differentia of
the genus. For a genus is always divided by differentiae that are
co-ordinate members of a division, as, for instance, by the terms
'walking', 'flying', 'aquatic', and 'biped'. Or see if, though the
contrasted differentia exists, it yet is not true of the genus, for
then, clearly, neither of them could be a differentia of the genus;
for differentiae that are co-ordinates in a division with the differentia
of a thing are all true of the genus to which the thing belongs. Likewise,
also, see if, though it be true, yet the addition of it to the genus
fails to make a species. For then, clearly, this could not be a specific
differentia of the genus: for a specific differentia, if added to
the genus, always makes a species. If, however, this be no true differentia,
no more is the one adduced, seeing that it is a co-ordinate member
of a division with this. 

Moreover, see if he divides the genus by a negation, as those do who
define line as 'length without breadth': for this means simply that
it has not any breadth. The genus will then be found to partake of
its own species: for, since of everything either an affirmation or
its negation is true, length must always either lack breadth or possess
it, so that 'length' as well, i.e. the genus of 'line', will be either
with or without breadth. But 'length without breadth' is the definition
of a species, as also is 'length with breadth': for 'without breadth'
and 'with breadth' are differentiae, and the genus and differentia
constitute the definition of the species. Hence the genus would admit
of the definition of its species. Likewise, also, it will admit of
the definition of the differentia, seeing that one or the other of
the aforesaid differentiae is of necessity predicated of the genus.
The usefulness of this principle is found in meeting those who assert
the existence of 'Ideas': for if absolute length exist, how will it
be predicable of the genus that it has breadth or that it lacks it?
For one assertion or the other will have to be true of 'length' universally,
if it is to be true of the genus at all: and this is contrary to the
fact: for there exist both lengths which have, and lengths which have
not, breadth. Hence the only people against whom the rule can be employed
are those who assert that a genus is always numerically one; and this
is what is done by those who assert the real existence of the 'Ideas';
for they allege that absolute length and absolute animal are the genus.

It may be that in some cases the definer is obliged to employ a negation
as well, e.g. in defining privations. For 'blind' means a thing which
cannot see when its nature is to see. There is no difference between
dividing the genus by a negation, and dividing it by such an affirmation
as is bound to have a negation as its co-ordinate in a division, e.g.
supposing he had defined something as 'length possessed of breadth';
for co-ordinate in the division with that which is possessed of breadth
is that which possesses no breadth and that only, so that again the
genus is divided by a negation. 

Again, see if he rendered the species as a differentia, as do those
who define 'contumely' as 'insolence accompanied by jeering'; for
jeering is a kind of insolence, i.e. it is a species and not a differentia.

Moreover, see if he has stated the genus as the differentia, e.g.
'Virtue is a good or noble state: for 'good' is the genus of 'virtue'.
Or possibly 'good' here is not the genus but the differentia, on the
principle that the same thing cannot be in two genera of which neither
contains the other: for 'good' does not include 'state', nor vice
versa: for not every state is good nor every good a 'state'. Both,
then, could not be genera, and consequently, if 'state' is the genus
of virtue, clearly 'good' cannot be its genus: it must rather be the
differentia'. Moreover, 'a state' indicates the essence of virtue,
whereas 'good' indicates not the essence but a quality: and to indicate
a quality is generally held to be the function of the differentia.
See, further, whether the differentia rendered indicates an individual
rather than a quality: for the general view is that the differentia
always expresses a quality. 

Look and see, further, whether the differentia belongs only by accident
to the object defined. For the differentia is never an accidental
attribute, any more than the genus is: for the differentia of a thing
cannot both belong and not belong to it. 

Moreover, if either the differentia or the species, or any of the
things which are under the species, is predicable of the genus, then
he could not have defined the term. For none of the aforesaid can
possibly be predicated of the genus, seeing that the genus is the
term with the widest range of all. Again, see if the genus be predicated
of the differentia; for the general view is that the genus is predicated,
not of the differentia, but of the objects of which the differentia
is predicated. Animal (e.g.) is predicated of 'man' or 'ox' or other
walking animals, not of the actual differentia itself which we predicate
of the species. For if 'animal' is to be predicated of each of its
differentiae, then 'animal' would be predicated of the species several
times over; for the differentiae are predicates of the species. Moreover,
the differentiae will be all either species or individuals, if they
are animals; for every animal is either a species or an individual.

Likewise you must inquire also if the species or any of the objects
that come under it is predicated of the differentia: for this is impossible,
seeing that the differentia is a term with a wider range than the
various species. Moreover, if any of the species be predicated of
it, the result will be that the differentia is a species: if, for
instance, 'man' be predicated, the differentia is clearly the human
race. Again, see if the differentia fails to be prior to the species:
for the differentia ought to be posterior to the genus, but prior
to the species. 

Look and see also if the differentia mentioned belongs to a different
genus, neither contained in nor containing the genus in question.
For the general view is that the same differentia cannot be used of
two non-subaltern genera. Else the result will be that the same species
as well will be in two non-subaltern genera: for each of the differentiae
imports its own genus, e.g. 'walking' and 'biped' import with them
the genus 'animal'. If, then, each of the genera as well is true of
that of which the differentia is true, it clearly follows that the
species must be in two non-subaltern genera. Or perhaps it is not
impossible for the same differentia to be used of two non-subaltern
genera, and we ought to add the words 'except they both be subordinate
members of the same genus'. Thus 'walking animal' and 'flying animal'
are non-subaltern genera, and 'biped' is the differentia of both.
The words 'except they both be subordinate members of the same genus'
ought therefore to be added; for both these are subordinate to 'animal'.
From this possibility, that the same differentia may be used of two
non-subaltern genera, it is clear also that there is no necessity
for the differentia to carry with it the whole of the genus to which
it belongs, but only the one or the other of its limbs together with
the genera that are higher than this, as 'biped' carries with it either
'flying' or 'walking animal'. 

See, too, if he has rendered 'existence in' something as the differentia
of a thing's essence: for the general view is that locality cannot
differentiate between one essence and another. Hence, too, people
condemn those who divide animals by means of the terms 'walking' and
'aquatic', on the ground that 'walking' and 'aquatic' indicate mere
locality. Or possibly in this case the censure is undeserved; for
'aquatic' does not mean 'in' anything; nor does it denote a locality,
but a certain quality: for even if the thing be on the dry land, still
it is aquatic: and likewise a land-animal, even though it be in the
water, will still be a and not an aquatic-animal. But all the same,
if ever the differentia does denote existence in something, clearly
he will have made a bad mistake. 

Again, see if he has rendered an affection as the differentia: for
every affection, if intensified, subverts the essence of the thing,
while the differentia is not of that kind: for the differentia is
generally considered rather to preserve that which it differentiates;
and it is absolutely impossible for a thing to exist without its own
special differentia: for if there be no 'walking', there will be no
'man'. In fact, we may lay down absolutely that a thing cannot have
as its differentia anything in respect of which it is subject to alteration:
for all things of that kind, if intensified, destroy its essence.
If, then, a man has rendered any differentia of this kind, he has
made a mistake: for we undergo absolutely no alteration in respect
of our differentiae. 

Again, see if he has failed to render the differentia of a relative
term relatively to something else; for the differentiae of relative
terms are themselves relative, as in the case also of knowledge. This
is classed as speculative, practical and productive; and each of these
denotes a relation: for it speculates upon something, and produces
something and does something. 

Look and see also if the definer renders each relative term relatively
to its natural purpose: for while in some cases the particular relative
term can be used in relation to its natural purpose only and to nothing
else, some can be used in relation to something else as well. Thus
sight can only be used for seeing, but a strigil can also be used
to dip up water. Still, if any one were to define a strigil as an
instrument for dipping water, he has made a mistake: for that is not
its natural function. The definition of a thing's natural function
is 'that for which it would be used by the prudent man, acting as
such, and by the science that deals specially with that thing'.

Or see if, whenever a term happens to be used in a number of relations,
he has failed to introduce it in its primary relation: e.g. by defining
'wisdom' as the virtue of 'man' or of the 'soul,' rather than of the
'reasoning faculty': for 'wisdom' is the virtue primarily of the reasoning
faculty: for it is in virtue of this that both the man and his soul
are said to be wise. 

Moreover, if the thing of which the term defined has been stated to
be an affection or disposition, or whatever it may be, be unable to
admit it, the definer has made a mistake. For every disposition and
every affection is formed naturally in that of which it is an affection
or disposition, as knowledge, too, is formed in the soul, being a
disposition of soul. Sometimes, however, people make bad mistakes
in matters of this sort, e.g. all those who say that 'sleep' is a
'failure of sensation', or that 'perplexity' is a state of 'equality
between contrary reasonings', or that 'pain' is a 'violent disruption
of parts that are naturally conjoined'. For sleep is not an attribute
of sensation, whereas it ought to be, if it is a failure of sensation.
Likewise, perplexity is not an attribute of opposite reasonings, nor
pain of parts naturally conjoined: for then inanimate things will
be in pain, since pain will be present in them. Similar in character,
too, is the definition of 'health', say, as a 'balance of hot and
cold elements': for then health will be necessarily exhibited by the
hot and cold elements: for balance of anything is an attribute inherent
in those things of which it is the balance, so that health would be
an attribute of them. Moreover, people who define in this way put
effect for cause, or cause for effect. For the disruption of parts
naturally conjoined is not pain, but only a cause of pain: nor again
is a failure of sensation sleep, but the one is the cause of the other:
for either we go to sleep because sensation fails, or sensation fails
because we go to sleep. Likewise also an equality between contrary
reasonings would be generally considered to be a cause of perplexity:
for it is when we reflect on both sides of a question and find everything
alike to be in keeping with either course that we are perplexed which
of the two we are to do. 

Moreover, with regard to all periods of time look and see whether
there be any discrepancy between the differentia and the thing defined:
e.g. supposing the 'immortal' to be defined as a 'living thing immune
at present from destruction'. For a living thing that is immune 'at
present' from destruction will be immortal 'at present'. Possibly,
indeed, in this case this result does not follow, owing to the ambiguity
of the words 'immune at present from destruction': for it may mean
either that the thing has not been destroyed at present, or that it
cannot be destroyed at present, or that at present it is such that
it never can be destroyed. Whenever, then, we say that a living thing
is at present immune from destruction, we mean that it is at present
a living thing of such a kind as never to be destroyed: and this is
equivalent to saying that it is immortal, so that it is not meant
that it is immortal only at present. Still, if ever it does happen
that what has been rendered according to the definition belongs in
the present only or past, whereas what is meant by the word does not
so belong, then the two could not be the same. So, then, this commonplace
rule ought to be followed, as we have said. 

Part 7

You should look and see also whether the term being defined is applied
in consideration of something other than the definition rendered.
Suppose (e.g.) a definition of 'justice' as the 'ability to distribute
what is equal'. This would not be right, for 'just' describes rather
the man who chooses, than the man who is able to distribute what is
equal: so that justice could not be an ability to distribute what
is equal: for then also the most just man would be the man with the
most ability to distribute what is equal. 

Moreover, see if the thing admits of degrees, whereas what is rendered
according to the definition does not, or, vice versa, what is rendered
according to the definition admits of degrees while the thing does
not. For either both must admit them or else neither, if indeed what
is rendered according to the definition is the same as the thing.
Moreover, see if, while both of them admit of degrees, they yet do
not both become greater together: e.g. suppose sexual love to be the
desire for intercourse: for he who is more intensely in love has not
a more intense desire for intercourse, so that both do not become
intensified at once: they certainly should, however, had they been
the same thing. 

Moreover, suppose two things to be before you, see if the term to
be defined applies more particularly to the one to which the content
of the definition is less applicable. Take, for instance, the definition
of 'fire' as the 'body that consists of the most rarefied particles'.
For 'fire' denotes flame rather than light, but flame is less the
body that consists of the most rarefied particles than is light: whereas
both ought to be more applicable to the same thing, if they had been
the same. Again, see if the one expression applies alike to both the
objects before you, while the other does not apply to both alike,
but more particularly to one of them. 

Moreover, see if he renders the definition relative to two things
taken separately: thus, the beautiful' is 'what is pleasant to the
eyes or to the ears": or 'the real' is 'what is capable of being acted
upon or of acting'. For then the same thing will be both beautiful
and not beautiful, and likewise will be both real and not real. For
'pleasant to the ears' will be the same as 'beautiful', so that 'not
pleasant to the ears' will be the same as 'not beautiful': for of
identical things the opposites, too, are identical, and the opposite
of 'beautiful' is 'not beautiful', while of 'pleasant to the ears'
the opposite is not pleasant to the cars': clearly, then, 'not pleasant
to the ears' is the same thing as 'not beautiful'. If, therefore,
something be pleasant to the eyes but not to the ears, it will be
both beautiful and not beautiful. In like manner we shall show also
that the same thing is both real and unreal. 

Moreover, of both genera and differentiae and all the other terms
rendered in definitions you should frame definitions in lieu of the
terms, and then see if there be any discrepancy between them.

Part 8

If the term defined be relative, either in itself or in respect of
its genus, see whether the definition fails to mention that to which
the term, either in itself or in respect of its genus, is relative,
e.g. if he has defined 'knowledge' as an 'incontrovertible conception'
or 'wishing' as 'painless conation'. For of everything relative the
essence is relative to something else, seeing that the being of every
relative term is identical with being in a certain relation to something.
He ought, therefore, to have said that knowledge is 'conception of
a knowable' and that wishing is 'conation for a good'. Likewise, also,
if he has defined 'grammar' as 'knowledge of letters': whereas in
the definition there ought to be rendered either the thing to which
the term itself is relative, or that, whatever it is, to which its
genus is relative. Or see if a relative term has been described not
in relation to its end, the end in anything being whatever is best
in it or gives its purpose to the rest. Certainly it is what is best
or final that should be stated, e.g. that desire is not for the pleasant
but for pleasure: for this is our purpose in choosing what is pleasant
as well. 

Look and see also if that in relation to which he has rendered the
term be a process or an activity: for nothing of that kind is an end,
for the completion of the activity or process is the end rather than
the process or activity itself. Or perhaps this rule is not true in
all cases, for almost everybody prefers the present experience of
pleasure to its cessation, so that they would count the activity as
the end rather than its completion. 

Again see in some cases if he has failed to distinguish the quantity
or quality or place or other differentiae of an object; e.g. the quality
and quantity of the honour the striving for which makes a man ambitious:
for all men strive for honour, so that it is not enough to define
the ambitious man as him who strives for honour, but the aforesaid
differentiae must be added. Likewise, also, in defining the covetous
man the quantity of money he aims at, or in the case of the incontinent
man the quality of the pleasures, should be stated. For it is not
the man who gives way to any sort of pleasure whatever who is called
incontinent, but only he who gives way to a certain kind of pleasure.
Or again, people sometimes define night as a 'shadow on the earth',
or an earthquake as a movement of the earth', or a cloud as 'condensation
of the air', or a wind as a 'movement of the air'; whereas they ought
to specify as well quantity, quality, place, and cause. Likewise,
also, in other cases of the kind: for by omitting any differentiae
whatever he fails to state the essence of the term. One should always
attack deficiency. For a movement of the earth does not constitute
an earthquake, nor a movement of the air a wind, irrespective of its
manner and the amount involved. 

Moreover, in the case of conations, and in any other cases where it
applies, see if the word 'apparent' is left out, e.g. 'wishing is
a conation after the good', or 'desire is a conation after the pleasant'-instead
of saying 'the apparently good', or 'pleasant'. For often those who
exhibit the conation do not perceive what is good or pleasant, so
that their aim need not be really good or pleasant, but only apparently
so. They ought, therefore, to have rendered the definition also accordingly.
On the other hand, any one who maintains the existence of Ideas ought
to be brought face to face with his Ideas, even though he does render
the word in question: for there can be no Idea of anything merely
apparent: the general view is that an Idea is always spoken of in
relation to an Idea: thus absolute desire is for the absolutely pleasant,
and absolute wishing is for the absolutely good; they therefore cannot
be for an apparent good or an apparently pleasant: for the existence
of an absolutely-apparently-good or pleasant would be an absurdity.

Part 9

Moreover, if the definition be of the state of anything, look at what
is in the state, while if it be of what is in the state, look at the
state: and likewise also in other cases of the kind. Thus if the pleasant
be identical with the beneficial, then, too, the man who is pleased
is benefited. Speaking generally, in definitions of this sort it happens
that what the definer defines is in a sense more than one thing: for
in defining knowledge, a man in a sense defines ignorance as well,
and likewise also what has knowledge and what lacks it, and what it
is to know and to be ignorant. For if the first be made clear, the
others become in a certain sense clear as well. We have, then, to
be on our guard in all such cases against discrepancy, using the elementary
principles drawn from consideration of contraries and of coordinates.

Moreover, in the case of relative terms, see if the species is rendered
as relative to a species of that to which the genus is rendered as
relative, e.g. supposing belief to be relative to some object of belief,
see whether a particular belief is made relative to some particular
object of belief: and, if a multiple be relative to a fraction, see
whether a particular multiple be made relative to a particular fraction.
For if it be not so rendered, clearly a mistake has been made.

See, also, if the opposite of the term has the opposite definition,
whether (e.g.) the definition of 'half' is the opposite of that of
'double': for if 'double' is 'that which exceeds another by an equal
amount to that other', 'half' is 'that which is exceeded by an amount
equal to itself'. In the same way, too, with contraries. For to the
contrary term will apply the definition that is contrary in some one
of the ways in which contraries are conjoined. Thus (e.g.) if 'useful'='productive
of good', 'injurious'=productive of evil' or 'destructive of good',
for one or the other of thee is bound to be contrary to the term originally
used. Suppose, then, neither of these things to be the contrary of
the term originally used, then clearly neither of the definitions
rendered later could be the definition of the contrary of the term
originally defined: and therefore the definition originally rendered
of the original term has not been rightly rendered either. Seeing,
moreover, that of contraries, the one is sometimes a word forced to
denote the privation of the other, as (e.g.) inequality is generally
held to be the privation of equality (for 'unequal' merely describes
things that are not equal'), it is therefore clear that that contrary
whose form denotes the privation must of necessity be defined through
the other; whereas the other cannot then be defined through the one
whose form denotes the privation; for else we should find that each
is being interpreted by the other. We must in the case of contrary
terms keep an eye on this mistake, e.g. supposing any one were to
define equality as the contrary of inequality: for then he is defining
it through the term which denotes privation of it. Moreover, a man
who so defines is bound to use in his definition the very term he
is defining; and this becomes clear, if for the word we substitute
its definition. For to say 'inequality' is the same as to say 'privation
of equality'. Therefore equality so defined will be 'the contrary
of the privation of equality', so that he would have used the very
word to be defined. Suppose, however, that neither of the contraries
be so formed as to denote privation, but yet the definition of it
be rendered in a manner like the above, e.g. suppose 'good' to be
defined as 'the contrary of evil', then, since it is clear that 'evil'
too will be 'the contrary of good' (for the definition of things that
are contrary in this must be rendered in a like manner), the result
again is that he uses the very term being defined: for 'good' is inherent
in the definition of 'evil'. If, then, 'good' be the contrary of evil,
and evil be nothing other than the 'contrary of good', then 'good'
will be the 'contrary of the contrary of good'. Clearly, then, he
has used the very word to be defined. 

Moreover, see if in rendering a term formed to denote privation, he
has failed to render the term of which it is the privation, e.g. the
state, or contrary, or whatever it may be whose privation it is: also
if he has omitted to add either any term at all in which the privation
is naturally formed, or else that in which it is naturally formed
primarily, e.g. whether in defining 'ignorance' a privation he has
failed to say that it is the privation of 'knowledge'; or has failed
to add in what it is naturally formed, or, though he has added this,
has failed to render the thing in which it is primarily formed, placing
it (e.g.) in 'man' or in 'the soul', and not in the 'reasoning faculty':
for if in any of these respects he fails, he has made a mistake. Likewise,
also, if he has failed to say that 'blindness' is the 'privation of
sight in an eye': for a proper rendering of its essence must state
both of what it is the privation and what it is that is deprived.

Examine further whether he has defined by the expression 'a privation'
a term that is not used to denote a privation: thus a mistake of this
sort also would be generally thought to be incurred in the case of
'error' by any one who is not using it as a merely negative term.
For what is generally thought to be in error is not that which has
no knowledge, but rather that which has been deceived, and for this
reason we do not talk of inanimate things or of children as 'erring'.
'Error', then, is not used to denote a mere privation of knowledge.

Part 10

Moreover, see whether the like inflexions in the definition apply
to the like inflexions of the term; e.g. if 'beneficial' means 'productive
of health', does 'beneficially' mean productively of health' and a
'benefactor' a 'producer of health'? 

Look too and see whether the definition given will apply to the Idea
as well. For in some cases it will not do so; e.g. in the Platonic
definition where he adds the word 'mortal' in his definitions of living
creatures: for the Idea (e.g. the absolute Man) is not mortal, so
that the definition will not fit the Idea. So always wherever the
words 'capable of acting on' or 'capable of being acted upon' are
added, the definition and the Idea are absolutely bound to be discrepant:
for those who assert the existence of Ideas hold that they are incapable
of being acted upon, or of motion. In dealing with these people even
arguments of this kind are useful. 

Further, see if he has rendered a single common definition of terms
that are used ambiguously. For terms whose definition corresponding
their common name is one and the same, are synonymous; if, then, the
definition applies in a like manner to the whole range of the ambiguous
term, it is not true of any one of the objects described by the term.
This is, moreover, what happens to Dionysius' definition of 'life'
when stated as 'a movement of a creature sustained by nutriment, congenitally
present with it': for this is found in plants as much as in animals,
whereas 'life' is generally understood to mean not one kind of thing
only, but to be one thing in animals and another in plants. It is
possible to hold the view that life is a synonymous term and is always
used to describe one thing only, and therefore to render the definition
in this way on purpose: or it may quite well happen that a man may
see the ambiguous character of the word, and wish to render the definition
of the one sense only, and yet fail to see that he has rendered a
definition common to both senses instead of one peculiar to the sense
he intends. In either case, whichever course he pursues, he is equally
at fault. Since ambiguous terms sometimes pass unobserved, it is best
in questioning to treat such terms as though they were synonymous
(for the definition of the one sense will not apply to the other,
so that the answerer will be generally thought not to have defined
it correctly, for to a synonymous term the definition should apply
in its full range), whereas in answering you should yourself distinguish
between the senses. Further, as some answerers call 'ambiguous' what
is really synonymous, whenever the definition rendered fails to apply
universally, and, vice versa, call synonymous what is really ambiguous
supposing their definition applies to both senses of the term, one
should secure a preliminary admission on such points, or else prove
beforehand that so-and-so is ambiguous or synonymous, as the case
may be: for people are more ready to agree when they do not foresee
what the consequence will be. If, however, no admission has been made,
and the man asserts that what is really synonymous is ambiguous because
the definition he has rendered will not apply to the second sense
as well, see if the definition of this second meaning applies also
to the other meanings: for if so, this meaning must clearly be synonymous
with those others. Otherwise, there will be more than one definition
of those other meanings, for there are applicable to them two distinct
definitions in explanation of the term, viz. the one previously rendered
and also the later one. Again, if any one were to define a term used
in several senses, and, finding that his definition does not apply
to them all, were to contend not that the term is ambiguous, but that
even the term does not properly apply to all those senses, just because
his definition will not do so either, then one may retort to such
a man that though in some things one must not use the language of
the people, yet in a question of terminology one is bound to employ
the received and traditional usage and not to upset matters of that
sort. 

Part 11

Suppose now that a definition has been rendered of some complex term,
take away the definition of one of the elements in the complex, and
see if also the rest of the definition defines the rest of it: if
not, it is clear that neither does the whole definition define the
whole complex. Suppose, e.g. that some one has defined a 'finite straight
line' as 'the limit of a finite plane, such that its centre is in
a line with its extremes'; if now the definition of a finite line'
be the 'limit of a finite plane', the rest (viz. 'such that its centre
is in a line with its extremes') ought to be a definition of straight'.
But an infinite straight line has neither centre nor extremes and
yet is straight so that this remainder does not define the remainder
of the term. 

Moreover, if the term defined be a compound notion, see if the definition
rendered be equimembral with the term defined. A definition is said
to be equimembral with the term defined when the number of the elements
compounded in the latter is the same as the number of nouns and verbs
in the definition. For the exchange in such cases is bound to be merely
one of term for term, in the case of some if not of all, seeing that
there are no more terms used now than formerly; whereas in a definition
terms ought to be rendered by phrases, if possible in every case,
or if not, in the majority. For at that rate, simple objects too could
be defined by merely calling them by a different name, e.g. 'cloak'
instead of 'doublet'. 

The mistake is even worse, if actually a less well known term be substituted,
e.g. 'pellucid mortal' for 'white man': for it is no definition, and
moreover is less intelligible when put in that form. 

Look and see also whether, in the exchange of words, the sense fails
still to be the same. Take, for instance, the explanation of 'speculative
knowledge' as 'speculative conception': for conception is not the
same as knowledge-as it certainly ought to be if the whole is to be
the same too: for though the word 'speculative' is common to both
expressions, yet the remainder is different. 

Moreover, see if in replacing one of the terms by something else he
has exchanged the genus and not the differentia, as in the example
just given: for 'speculative' is a less familiar term than knowledge;
for the one is the genus and the other the differentia, and the genus
is always the most familiar term of all; so that it is not this, but
the differentia, that ought to have been changed, seeing that it is
the less familiar. It might be held that this criticism is ridiculous:
because there is no reason why the most familiar term should not describe
the differentia, and not the genus; in which case, clearly, the term
to be altered would also be that denoting the genus and not the differentia.
If, however, a man is substituting for a term not merely another term
but a phrase, clearly it is of the differentia rather than of the
genus that a definition should be rendered, seeing that the object
of rendering the definition is to make the subject familiar; for the
differentia is less familiar than the genus. 

If he has rendered the definition of the differentia, see whether
the definition rendered is common to it and something else as well:
e.g. whenever he says that an odd number is a 'number with a middle',
further definition is required of how it has a middle: for the word
'number' is common to both expressions, and it is the word 'odd' for
which the phrase has been substituted. Now both a line and a body
have a middle, yet they are not 'odd'; so that this could not be a
definition of 'odd'. If, on the other hand, the phrase 'with a middle'
be used in several senses, the sense here intended requires to be
defined. So that this will either discredit the definition or prove
that it is no definition at all. 

Part 12

Again, see if the term of which he renders the definition is a reality,
whereas what is contained in the definition is not, e.g. Suppose 'white'
to be defined as 'colour mingled with fire': for what is bodiless
cannot be mingled with body, so that 'colour' 'mingled with fire'
could not exist, whereas 'white' does exist. 

Moreover, those who in the case of relative terms do not distinguish
to what the object is related, but have described it only so as to
include it among too large a number of things, are wrong either wholly
or in part; e.g. suppose some one to have defined 'medicine' as a
science of Reality'. For if medicine be not a science of anything
that is real, the definition is clearly altogether false; while if
it be a science of some real thing, but not of another, it is partly
false; for it ought to hold of all reality, if it is said to be of
Reality essentially and not accidentally: as is the case with other
relative terms: for every object of knowledge is a term relative to
knowledge: likewise, also, with other relative terms, inasmuch as
all such are convertible. Moreover, if the right way to render account
of a thing be to render it as it is not in itself but accidentally,
then each and every relative term would be used in relation not to
one thing but to a number of things. For there is no reason why the
same thing should not be both real and white and good, so that it
would be a correct rendering to render the object in relation to any
one whatsoever of these, if to render what it is accidentally be a
correct way to render it. It is, moreover, impossible that a definition
of this sort should be peculiar to the term rendered: for not only
but the majority of the other sciences too, have for their object
some real thing, so that each will be a science of reality. Clearly,
then, such a definition does not define any science at all; for a
definition ought to be peculiar to its own term, not general.

Sometimes, again, people define not the thing but only the thing in
a good or perfect condition. Such is the definition of a rhetorician
as 'one who can always see what will persuade in the given circumstances,
and omit nothing'; or of a thief, as 'one who pilfers in secret':
for clearly, if they each do this, then the one will be a good rhetorician,
and the other a good thief: whereas it is not the actual pilfering
in secret, but the wish to do it, that constitutes the thief.

Again, see if he has rendered what is desirable for its own sake as
desirable for what it produces or does, or as in any way desirable
because of something else, e.g. by saying that justice is 'what preserves
the laws' or that wisdom is 'what produces happiness'; for what produces
or preserves something else is one of the things desirable for something
else. It might be said that it is possible for what is desirable in
itself to be desirable for something else as well: but still to define
what is desirable in itself in such a way is none the less wrong:
for the essence contains par excellence what is best in anything,
and it is better for a thing to be desirable in itself than to be
desirable for something else, so that this is rather what the definition
too ought to have indicated. 

Part 13

See also whether in defining anything a man has defined it as an 'A
and B', or as a 'product of A and B' or as an 'A+B'. If he defines
it as and B', the definition will be true of both and yet of neither
of them; suppose, e.g. justice to be defined as 'temperance and courage.'
For if of two persons each has one of the two only, both and yet neither
will be just: for both together have justice, and yet each singly
fails to have it. Even if the situation here described does not so
far appear very absurd because of the occurrence of this kind of thing
in other cases also (for it is quite possible for two men to have
a mina between them, though neither of them has it by himself), yet
least that they should have contrary attributes surely seems quite
absurd; and yet this will follow if the one be temperate and yet a
coward, and the other, though brave, be a profligate; for then both
will exhibit both justice and injustice: for if justice be temperance
and bravery, then injustice will be cowardice and profligacy. In general,
too, all the ways of showing that the whole is not the same as the
sum of its parts are useful in meeting the type just described; for
a man who defines in this way seems to assert that the parts are the
same as the whole. The arguments are particularly appropriate in cases
where the process of putting the parts together is obvious, as in
a house and other things of that sort: for there, clearly, you may
have the parts and yet not have the whole, so that parts and whole
cannot be the same. 

If, however, he has said that the term being defined is not 'A and
B' but the 'product of A and B', look and see in the first place if
A and B cannot in the nature of things have a single product: for
some things are so related to one another that nothing can come of
them, e.g. a line and a number. Moreover, see if the term that has
been defined is in the nature of things found primarily in some single
subject, whereas the things which he has said produce it are not found
primarily in any single subject, but each in a separate one. If so,
clearly that term could not be the product of these things: for the
whole is bound to be in the same things wherein its parts are, so
that the whole will then be found primarily not in one subject only,
but in a number of them. If, on the other hand, both parts and whole
are found primarily in some single subject, see if that medium is
not the same, but one thing in the case of the whole and another in
that of the parts. Again, see whether the parts perish together with
the whole: for it ought to happen, vice versa, that the whole perishes
when the parts perish; when the whole perishes, there is no necessity
that the parts should perish too. Or again, see if the whole be good
or evil, and the parts neither, or, vice versa, if the parts be good
or evil and the whole neither. For it is impossible either for a neutral
thing to produce something good or bad, or for things good or bad
to produce a neutral thing. Or again, see if the one thing is more
distinctly good than the other is evil, and yet the product be no
more good than evil, e.g. suppose shamelessness be defined as 'the
product of courage and false opinion': here the goodness of courage
exceeds the evil of false opinion; accordingly the product of these
ought to have corresponded to this excess, and to be either good without
qualification, or at least more good than evil. Or it may be that
this does not necessarily follow, unless each be in itself good or
bad; for many things that are productive are not good in themselves,
but only in combination; or, per contra, they are good taken singly,
and bad or neutral in combination. What has just been said is most
clearly illustrated in the case of things that make for health or
sickness; for some drugs are such that each taken alone is good, but
if they are both administered in a mixture, bad. 

Again, see whether the whole, as produced from a better and worse,
fails to be worse than the better and better than the worse element.
This again, however, need not necessarily be the case, unless the
elements compounded be in themselves good; if they are not, the whole
may very well not be good, as in the cases just instanced.

Moreover, see if the whole be synonymous with one of the elements:
for it ought not to be, any more than in the case of syllables: for
the syllable is not synonymous with any of the letters of which it
is made up. 

Moreover, see if he has failed to state the manner of their composition:
for the mere mention of its elements is not enough to make the thing
intelligible. For the essence of any compound thing is not merely
that it is a product of so-and-so, but that it is a product of them
compounded in such and such a way, just as in the case of a house:
for here the materials do not make a house irrespective of the way
they are put together. 

If a man has defined an object as 'A+B', the first thing to be said
is that 'A+B' means the same either as 'A and B', or as the 'product
of A and B.' for 'honey+water' means either the honey and the water,
or the 'drink made of honey and water'. If, then, he admits that 'A+B'
is + B' is the same as either of these two things, the same criticisms
will apply as have already been given for meeting each of them. Moreover,
distinguish between the different senses in which one thing may be
said to be '+' another, and see if there is none of them in which
A could be said to exist '+ B.' Thus e.g. supposing the expression
to mean that they exist either in some identical thing capable of
containing them (as e.g. justice and courage are found in the soul),
or else in the same place or in the same time, and if this be in no
way true of the A and B in question, clearly the definition rendered
could not hold of anything, as there is no possible way in which A
can exist B'. If, however, among the various senses above distinguished,
it be true that A and B are each found in the same time as the other,
look and see if possibly the two are not used in the same relation.
Thus e.g. suppose courage to have been defined as 'daring with right
reasoning': here it is possible that the person exhibits daring in
robbery, and right reasoning in regard to the means of health: but
he may have 'the former quality+the latter' at the same time, and
not as yet be courageous! Moreover, even though both be used in the
same relation as well, e.g. in relation to medical treatment (for
a man may exhibit both daring and right reasoning in respect of medical
treatment), still, none the less, not even this combination of 'the
one+the other 'makes him 'courageous'. For the two must not relate
to any casual object that is the same, any more than each to a different
object; rather, they must relate to the function of courage, e.g.
meeting the perils of war, or whatever is more properly speaking its
function than this. 

Some definitions rendered in this form fail to come under the aforesaid
division at all, e.g. a definition of anger as 'pain with a consciousness
of being slighted'. For what this means to say is that it is because
of a consciousness of this sort that the pain occurs; but to occur
'because of' a thing is not the same as to occur '+ a thing' in any
of its aforesaid senses. 

Part 14

Again, if he have described the whole compounded as the 'composition'
of these things (e.g. 'a living creature' as a 'composition of soul
and body'), first of all see whether he has omitted to state the kind
of composition, as (e.g.) in a definition of 'flesh' or 'bone' as
the 'composition of fire, earth, and air'. For it is not enough to
say it is a composition, but you should also go on to define the kind
of composition: for these things do not form flesh irrespective of
the manner of their composition, but when compounded in one way they
form flesh, when in another, bone. It appears, moreover, that neither
of the aforesaid substances is the same as a 'composition' at all:
for a composition always has a decomposition as its contrary, whereas
neither of the aforesaid has any contrary. Moreover, if it is equally
probable that every compound is a composition or else that none is,
and every kind of living creature, though a compound, is never a composition,
then no other compound could be a composition either. 

Again, if in the nature of a thing two contraries are equally liable
to occur, and the thing has been defined through the one, clearly
it has not been defined; else there will be more than one definition
of the same thing; for how is it any more a definition to define it
through this one than through the other, seeing that both alike are
naturally liable to occur in it? Such is the definition of the soul,
if defined as a substance capable of receiving knowledge: for it has
a like capacity for receiving ignorance. 

Also, even when one cannot attack the definition as a whole for lack
of acquaintance with the whole, one should attack some part of it,
if one knows that part and sees it to be incorrectly rendered: for
if the part be demolished, so too is the whole definition. Where,
again, a definition is obscure, one should first of all correct and
reshape it in order to make some part of it clear and get a handle
for attack, and then proceed to examine it. For the answerer is bound
either to accept the sense as taken by the questioner, or else himself
to explain clearly whatever it is that his definition means. Moreover,
just as in the assemblies the ordinary practice is to move an emendation
of the existing law and, if the emendation is better, they repeal
the existing law, so one ought to do in the case of definitions as
well: one ought oneself to propose a second definition: for if it
is seen to be better, and more indicative of the object defined, clearly
the definition already laid down will have been demolished, on the
principle that there cannot be more than one definition of the same
thing. 

In combating definitions it is always one of the chief elementary
principles to take by oneself a happy shot at a definition of the
object before one, or to adopt some correctly expressed definition.
For one is bound, with the model (as it were) before one's eyes, to
discern both any shortcoming in any features that the definition ought
to have, and also any superfluous addition, so that one is better
supplied with lines of attack. 

As to definitions, then, let so much suffice. 

 

BOOK VII

Part 1 

Whether two things are 'the same' or 'different', in the most literal
of the meanings ascribed to 'sameness' (and we said' that 'the same'
applies in the most literal sense to what is numerically one), may
be examined in the light of their inflexions and coordinates and opposites.
For if justice be the same as courage, then too the just man is the
same as the brave man, and 'justly' is the same as 'bravely'. Likewise,
too, in the case of their opposites: for if two things be the same,
their opposites also will be the same, in any of the recognized forms
of opposition. For it is the same thing to take the opposite of the
one or that of the other, seeing that they are the same. Again it
may be examined in the light of those things which tend to produce
or to destroy the things in question of their formation and destruction,
and in general of any thing that is related in like manner to each.
For where things are absolutely the same, their formations and destructions
also are the same, and so are the things that tend to produce or to
destroy them. Look and see also, in a case where one of two things
is said to be something or other in a superlative degree, if the other
of these alleged identical things can also be described by a superlative
in the same respect. Thus Xenocrates argues that the happy life and
the good life are the same, seeing that of all forms of life the good
life is the most desirable and so also is the happy life: for 'the
most desirable' and the greatest' apply but to one thing.' Likewise
also in other cases of the kind. Each, however, of the two things
termed 'greatest' or most desirable' must be numerically one: otherwise
no proof will have been given that they are the same; for it does
not follow because Peloponnesians and Spartans are the bravest of
the Greeks, that Peloponnesians are the same as Spartans, seeing that
'Peloponnesian' is not any one person nor yet 'Spartan'; it only follows
that the one must be included under the other as 'Spartans' are under
'Peloponnesians': for otherwise, if the one class be not included
under the other, each will be better than the other. For then the
Peloponnesians are bound to be better than the Spartans, seeing that
the one class is not included under the other; for they are better
than anybody else. Likewise also the Spartans must perforce be better
than the Peloponnesians; for they too are better than anybody else;
each then is better than the other! Clearly therefore what is styled
'best' and 'greatest' must be a single thing, if it is to be proved
to be 'the same' as another. This also is why Xenocrates fails to
prove his case: for the happy life is not numerically single, nor
yet the good life, so that it does not follow that, because they are
both the most desirable, they are therefore the same, but only that
the one falls under the other. 

Again, look and see if, supposing the one to be the same as something,
the other also is the same as it: for if they be not both the same
as the same thing, clearly neither are they the same as one another.

Moreover, examine them in the light of their accidents or of the things
of which they are accidents: for any accident belonging to the one
must belong also to the other, and if the one belong to anything as
an accident, so must the other also. If in any of these respects there
is a discrepancy, clearly they are not the same. 

See further whether, instead of both being found in one class of predicates,
the one signifies a quality and the other a quantity or relation.
Again, see if the genus of each be not the same, the one being 'good'
and the other evil', or the one being 'virtue' and the other 'knowledge':
or see if, though the genus is the same, the differentiae predicted
of either be not the same, the one (e.g.) being distinguished as a
'speculative' science, the other as a 'practical' science. Likewise
also in other cases. 

Moreover, from the point of view of 'degrees', see if the one admits
an increase of degree but not the other, or if though both admit it,
they do not admit it at the same time; just as it is not the case
that a man desires intercourse more intensely, the more intensely
he is in love, so that love and the desire for intercourse are not
the same. 

Moreover, examine them by means of an addition, and see whether the
addition of each to the same thing fails to make the same whole; or
if the subtraction of the same thing from each leaves a different
remainder. Suppose (e.g.) that he has declared 'double a half' to
be the same as 'a multiple of a half': then, subtracting the words
'a half' from each, the remainders ought to have signified the same
thing: but they do not; for 'double' and 'a multiple of' do not signify
the same thing. 

Inquire also not only if some impossible consequence results directly
from the statement made, that A and B are the same, but also whether
it is possible for a supposition to bring it about; as happens to
those who assert that 'empty' is the same as 'full of air': for clearly
if the air be exhausted, the vessel will not be less but more empty,
though it will no longer be full of air. So that by a supposition,
which may be true or may be false (it makes no difference which),
the one character is annulled and not the other, showing that they
are not the same. 

Speaking generally, one ought to be on the look-out for any discrepancy
anywhere in any sort of predicate of each term, and in the things
of which they are predicated. For all that is predicated of the one
should be predicated also of the other, and of whatever the one is
a predicate, the other should be a predicate of it as well.

Moreover, as 'sameness' is a term used in many senses, see whether
things that are the same in one way are the same also in a different
way. For there is either no necessity or even no possibility that
things that are the same specifically or generically should be numerically
the same, and it is with the question whether they are or are not
the same in that sense that we are concerned. 

Moreover, see whether the one can exist without the other; for, if
so, they could not be the same. 

Part 2

Such is the number of the commonplace rules that relate to 'sameness'.
It is clear from what has been said that all the destructive commonplaces
relating to sameness are useful also in questions of definition, as
was said before:' for if what is signified by the term and by the
expression be not the same, clearly the expression rendered could
not be a definition. None of the constructive commonplaces, on the
other hand, helps in the matter of definition; for it is not enough
to show the sameness of content between the expression and the term,
in order to establish that the former is a definition, but a definition
must have also all the other characters already announced.

Part 3

This then is the way, and these the arguments, whereby the attempt
to demolish a definition should always be made. If, on the other hand,
we desire to establish one, the first thing to observe is that few
if any who engage in discussion arrive at a definition by reasoning:
they always assume something of the kind as their starting points-both
in geometry and in arithmetic and the other studies of that kind.
In the second place, to say accurately what a definition is, and how
it should be given, belongs to another inquiry. At present it concerns
us only so far as is required for our present purpose, and accordingly
we need only make the bare statement that to reason to a thing's definition
and essence is quite possible. For if a definition is an expression
signifying the essence of the thing and the predicates contained therein
ought also to be the only ones which are predicated of the thing in
the category of essence; and genera and differentiae are so predicated
in that category: it is obvious that if one were to get an admission
that so and so are the only attributes predicated in that category,
the expression containing so and so would of necessity be a definition;
for it is impossible that anything else should be a definition, seeing
that there is not anything else predicated of the thing in the category
of essence. 

That a definition may thus be reached by a process of reasoning is
obvious. The means whereby it should be established have been more
precisely defined elsewhere, but for the purposes of the inquiry now
before us the same commonplace rules serve. For we have to examine
into the contraries and other opposites of the thing, surveying the
expressions used both as wholes and in detail: for if the opposite
definition defines that opposite term, the definition given must of
necessity be that of the term before us. Seeing, however, that contraries
may be conjoined in more than one way, we have to select from those
contraries the one whose contrary definition seems most obvious. The
expressions, then, have to be examined each as a whole in the way
we have said, and also in detail as follows. First of all, see that
the genus rendered is correctly rendered; for if the contrary thing
be found in the contrary genus to that stated in the definition, and
the thing before you is not in that same genus, then it would clearly
be in the contrary genus: for contraries must of necessity be either
in the same genus or in contrary genera. The differentiae, too, that
are predicated of contraries we expect to be contrary, e.g. those
of white and black, for the one tends to pierce the vision, while
the other tends to compress it. So that if contrary differentiae to
those in the definition are predicated of the contrary term, then
those rendered in the definition would be predicated of the term before
us. Seeing, then, that both the genus and the differentiae have been
rightly rendered, clearly the expression given must be the right definition.
It might be replied that there is no necessity why contrary differentiae
should be predicated of contraries, unless the contraries be found
within the same genus: of things whose genera are themselves contraries
it may very well be that the same differentia is used of both, e.g.
of justice and injustice; for the one is a virtue and the other a
vice of the soul: 'of the soul', therefore, is the differentia in
both cases, seeing that the body as well has its virtue and vice.
But this much at least is true, that the differentiae of contraries
are either contrary or else the same. If, then, the contrary differentia
to that given be predicated of the contrary term and not of the one
in hand, clearly the differentia stated must be predicated of the
latter. Speaking generally, seeing that the definition consists of
genus and differentiae, if the definition of the contrary term be
apparent, the definition of the term before you will be apparent also:
for since its contrary is found either in the same genus or in the
contrary genus, and likewise also the differentiae predicated of opposites
are either contrary to, or the same as, each other, clearly of the
term before you there will be predicated either the same genus as
of its contrary, while, of its differentiae, either all are contrary
to those of its contrary, or at least some of them are so while the
rest remain the same; or, vice versa, the differentiae will be the
same and the genera contrary; or both genera and differentiae will
be contrary. And that is all; for that both should be the same is
not possible; else contraries will have the same definition.

Moreover, look at it from the point of view of its inflexions and
coordinates. For genera and definitions are bound to correspond in
either case. Thus if forgetfulness be the loss of knowledge, to forget
is to lose knowledge, and to have forgotten is to have lost knowledge.
If, then, any one whatever of these is agreed to, the others must
of necessity be agreed to as well. Likewise, also, if destruction
is the decomposition of the thing's essence, then to be destroyed
is to have its essence decomposed, and 'destructively' means 'in such
a way as to decompose its essence'; if again 'destructive' means 'apt
to decompose something's essence', then also 'destruction' means 'the
decomposition of its essence'. Likewise also with the rest: an admission
of any one of them whatever, and all the rest are admitted too.

Moreover, look at it from the point of view of things that stand in
relations that are like each other. For if 'healthy' means 'productive
of health', 'vigorous' too will mean 'productive of vigour', and 'useful'
will mean 'productive of good.' For each of these things is related
in like manner to its own peculiar end, so that if one of them is
defined as 'productive of' that end, this will also be the definition
of each of the rest as well. 

Moreover, look at it from the point of and like degrees, in all the
ways in which it is possible to establish a result by comparing two
and two together. Thus if A defines a better than B defines and B
is a definition of so too is A of a. Further, if A's claim to define
a is like B's to define B, and B defines B, then A too defines a.
This examination from the point of view of greater degrees is of no
use when a single definition is compared with two things, or two definitions
with one thing; for there cannot possibly be one definition of two
things or two of the same thing. 

Part 4

The most handy of all the commonplace arguments are those just mentioned
and those from co-ordinates and inflexions, and these therefore are
those which it is most important to master and to have ready to hand:
for they are the most useful on the greatest number of occasions.
Of the rest, too, the most important are those of most general application:
for these are the most effective, e.g. that you should examine the
individual cases, and then look to see in the case of their various
species whether the definition applies. For the species is synonymous
with its individuals. This sort of inquiry is of service against those
who assume the existence of Ideas, as has been said before.' Moreover
see if a man has used a term metaphorically, or predicated it of itself
as though it were something different. So too if any other of the
commonplace rules is of general application and effective, it should
be employed. 

Part 5

That it is more difficult to establish than to overthrow a definition,
is obvious from considerations presently to be urged. For to see for
oneself, and to secure from those whom one is questioning, an admission
of premisses of this sort is no simple matter, e.g. that of the elements
of the definition rendered the one is genus and the other differentia,
and that only the genus and differentiae are predicated in the category
of essence. Yet without these premisses it is impossible to reason
to a definition; for if any other things as well are predicated of
the thing in the category of essence, there is no telling whether
the formula stated or some other one is its definition, for a definition
is an expression indicating the essence of a thing. The point is clear
also from the following: It is easier to draw one conclusion than
many. Now in demolishing a definition it is sufficient to argue against
one point only (for if we have overthrown any single point whatsoever,
we shall have demolished the definition); whereas in establishing
a definition, one is bound to bring people to the view that everything
contained in the definition is attributable. Moreover, in establishing
a case, the reasoning brought forward must be universal: for the definition
put forward must be predicated of everything of which the term is
predicated, and must moreover be convertible, if the definition rendered
is to be peculiar to the subject. In overthrowing a view, on the other
hand, there is no longer any necessity to show one's point universally:
for it is enough to show that the formula is untrue of any one of
the things embraced under the term. 

Further, even supposing it should be necessary to overthrow something
by a universal proposition, not even so is there any need to prove
the converse of the proposition in the process of overthrowing the
definition. For merely to show that the definition fails to be predicated
of every one of the things of which the term is predicated, is enough
to overthrow it universally: and there is no need to prove the converse
of this in order to show that the term is predicated of things of
which the expression is not predicated. Moreover, even if it applies
to everything embraced under the term, but not to it alone, the definition
is thereby demolished. 

The case stands likewise in regard to the property and genus of a
term also. For in both cases it is easier to overthrow than to establish.
As regards the property this is clear from what has been said: for
as a rule the property is rendered in a complex phrase, so that to
overthrow it, it is only necessary to demolish one of the terms used,
whereas to establish it is necessary to reason to them all. Then,
too, nearly all the other rules that apply to the definition will
apply also to the property of a thing. For in establishing a property
one has to show that it is true of everything included under the term
in question, whereas to overthrow one it is enough to show in a single
case only that it fails to belong: further, even if it belongs to
everything falling under the term, but not to that only, it is overthrown
in this case as well, as was explained in the case of the definition.
In regard to the genus, it is clear that you are bound to establish
it in one way only, viz. by showing that it belongs in every case,
while of overthrowing it there are two ways: for if it has been shown
that it belongs either never or not in a certain case, the original
statement has been demolished. Moreover, in establishing a genus it
is not enough to show that it belongs, but also that it belongs as
genus has to be shown; whereas in overthrowing it, it is enough to
show its failure to belong either in some particular case or in every
case. It appears, in fact, as though, just as in other things to destroy
is easier than to create, so in these matters too to overthrow is
easier than to establish. 

In the case of an accidental attribute the universal proposition is
easier to overthrow than to establish; for to establish it, one has
to show that it belongs in every case, whereas to overthrow it, it
is enough to show that it does not belong in one single case. The
particular proposition is, on the contrary, easier to establish than
to overthrow: for to establish it, it is enough to show that it belongs
in a particular instance, whereas to overthrow it, it has to be shown
that it never belongs at all. 

It is clear also that the easiest thing of all is to overthrow a definition.
For on account of the number of statements involved we are presented
in the definition with the greatest number of points for attack, and
the more plentiful the material, the quicker an argument comes: for
there is more likelihood of a mistake occurring in a large than in
a small number of things. Moreover, the other rules too may be used
as means for attacking a definition: for if either the formula be
not peculiar, or the genus rendered be the wrong one, or something
included in the formula fail to belong, the definition is thereby
demolished. On the other hand, against the others we cannot bring
all of the arguments drawn from definitions, nor yet of the rest:
for only those relating to accidental attributes apply generally to
all the aforesaid kinds of attribute. For while each of the aforesaid
kinds of attribute must belong to the thing in question, yet the genus
may very well not belong as a property without as yet being thereby
demolished. Likewise also the property need not belong as a genus,
nor the accident as a genus or property, so long as they do belong.
So that it is impossible to use one set as a basis of attack upon
the other except in the case of definition. Clearly, then, it is the
easiest of all things to demolish a definition, while to establish
one is the hardest. For there one both has to establish all those
other points by reasoning (i.e. that the attributes stated belong,
and that the genus rendered is the true genus, and that the formula
is peculiar to the term), and moreover, besides this, that the formula
indicates the essence of the thing; and this has to be done correctly.

Of the rest, the property is most nearly of this kind: for it is easier
to demolish, because as a rule it contains several terms; while it
is the hardest to establish, both because of the number of things
that people must be brought to accept, and, besides this, because
it belongs to its subject alone and is predicated convertibly with
its subject. 

The easiest thing of all to establish is an accidental predicate:
for in other cases one has to show not only that the predicate belongs,
but also that it belongs in such and such a particular way: whereas
in the case of the accident it is enough to show merely that it belongs.
On the other hand, an accidental predicate is the hardest thing to
overthrow, because it affords the least material: for in stating accident
a man does not add how the predicate belongs; and accordingly, while
in other cases it is possible to demolish what is said in two ways,
by showing either that the predicate does not belong, or that it does
not belong in the particular way stated, in the case of an accidental
predicate the only way to demolish it is to show that it does not
belong at all. 

The commonplace arguments through which we shall be well supplied
with lines of argument with regard to our several problems have now
been enumerated at about sufficient length. 

 

BOOK VIII

Part 1 

Next there fall to be discussed the problems of arrangement and method
in pitting questions. Any one who intends to frame questions must,
first of all, select the ground from which he should make his attack;
secondly, he must frame them and arrange them one by one to himself;
thirdly and lastly, he must proceed actually to put them to the other
party. Now so far as the selection of his ground is concerned the
problem is one alike for the philosopher and the dialectician; but
how to go on to arrange his points and frame his questions concerns
the dialectician only: for in every problem of that kind a reference
to another party is involved. Not so with the philosopher, and the
man who is investigating by himself: the premisses of his reasoning,
although true and familiar, may be refused by the answerer because
they lie too near the original statement and so he foresees what will
follow if he grants them: but for this the philosopher does not care.
Nay, he may possibly be even anxious to secure axioms as familiar
and as near to the question in hand as possible: for these are the
bases on which scientific reasonings are built up. 

The sources from which one's commonplace arguments should be drawn
have already been described:' we have now to discuss the arrangement
and formation of questions and first to distinguish the premisses,
other than the necessary premisses, which have to be adopted. By necessary
premisses are meant those through which the actual reasoning is constructed.
Those which are secured other than these are of four kinds; they serve
either inductively to secure the universal premiss being granted,
or to lend weight to the argument, or to conceal the conclusion, or
to render the argument more clear. Beside these there is no other
premiss which need be secured: these are the ones whereby you should
try to multiply and formulate your questions. Those which are used
to conceal the conclusion serve a controversial purpose only; but
inasmuch as an undertaking of this sort is always conducted against
another person, we are obliged to employ them as well. 

The necessary premisses through which the reasoning is effected, ought
not to be propounded directly in so many words. Rather one should
soar as far aloof from them as possible. Thus if one desires to secure
an admission that the knowledge of contraries is one, one should ask
him to admit it not of contraries, but of opposites: for, if he grants
this, one will then argue that the knowledge of contraries is also
the same, seeing that contraries are opposites; if he does not, one
should secure the admission by induction, by formulating a proposition
to that effect in the case of some particular pair of contraries.
For one must secure the necessary premisses either by reasoning or
by induction, or else partly by one and partly by the other, although
any propositions which are too obvious to be denied may be formulated
in so many words. This is because the coming conclusion is less easily
discerned at the greater distance and in the process of induction,
while at the same time, even if one cannot reach the required premisses
in this way, it is still open to one to formulate them in so many
words. The premisses, other than these, that were mentioned above,
must be secured with a view to the latter. The way to employ them
respectively is as follows: Induction should proceed from individual
cases to the universal and from the known to the unknown; and the
objects of perception are better known, to most people if not invariably.
Concealment of one's plan is obtained by securing through prosyllogisms
the premisses through which the proof of the original proposition
is going to be constructed-and as many of them as possible. This is
likely to be effected by making syllogisms to prove not only the necessary
premisses but also some of those which are required to establish them.
Moreover, do not state the conclusions of these premisses but draw
them later one after another; for this is likely to keep the answerer
at the greatest possible distance from the original proposition. Speaking
generally, a man who desires to get information by a concealed method
should so put his questions that when he has put his whole argument
and has stated the conclusion, people still ask 'Well, but why is
that?' This result will be secured best of all by the method above
described: for if one states only the final conclusion, it is unclear
how it comes about; for the answerer does not foresee on what grounds
it is based, because the previous syllogisms have not been made articulate
to him: while the final syllogism, showing the conclusion, is likely
to be kept least articulate if we lay down not the secured propositions
on which it is based, but only the grounds on which we reason to them.

It is a useful rule, too, not to secure the admissions claimed as
the bases of the syllogisms in their proper order, but alternately
those that conduce to one conclusion and those that conduce to another;
for, if those which go together are set side by side, the conclusion
that will result from them is more obvious in advance. 

One should also, wherever possible, secure the universal premiss by
a definition relating not to the precise terms themselves but to their
co-ordinates; for people deceive themselves, whenever the definition
is taken in regard to a co-ordinate, into thinking that they are not
making the admission universally. An instance would be, supposing
one had to secure the admission that the angry man desires vengeance
on account of an apparent slight, and were to secure this, that 'anger'
is a desire for vengeance on account of an apparent slight: for, clearly,
if this were secured, we should have universally what we intend. If,
on the other hand, people formulate propositions relating to the actual
terms themselves, they often find that the answerer refuses to grant
them because on the actual term itself he is readier with his objection,
e.g. that the 'angry man' does not desire vengeance, because we become
angry with our parents, but we do not desire vengeance on them. Very
likely the objection is not valid; for upon some people it is vengeance
enough to cause them pain and make them sorry; but still it gives
a certain plausibility and air of reasonableness to the denial of
the proposition. In the case, however, of the definition of 'anger'
it is not so easy to find an objection. 

Moreover, formulate your proposition as though you did so not for
its own sake, but in order to get at something else: for people are
shy of granting what an opponent's case really requires. Speaking
generally, a questioner should leave it as far as possible doubtful
whether he wishes to secure an admission of his proposition or of
its opposite: for if it be uncertain what their opponent's argument
requires, people are more ready to say what they themselves think.

Moreover, try to secure admissions by means of likeness: for such
admissions are plausible, and the universal involved is less patent;
e.g. make the other person admit that as knowledge and ignorance of
contraries is the same, so too perception of contraries is the same;
or vice versa, that since the perception is the same, so is the knowledge
also. This argument resembles induction, but is not the same thing;
for in induction it is the universal whose admission is secured from
the particulars, whereas in arguments from likeness, what is secured
is not the universal under which all the like cases fall.

It is a good rule also, occasionally to bring an objection against
oneself: for answerers are put off their guard against those who appear
to be arguing impartially. It is useful too, to add that 'So and so
is generally held or commonly said'; for people are shy of upsetting
the received opinion unless they have some positive objection to urge:
and at the same time they are cautious about upsetting such things
because they themselves too find them useful. Moreover, do not be
insistent, even though you really require the point: for insistence
always arouses the more opposition. Further, formulate your premiss
as though it were a mere illustration: for people admit the more readily
a proposition made to serve some other purpose, and not required on
its own account. Moreover, do not formulate the very proposition you
need to secure, but rather something from which that necessarily follows:
for people are more willing to admit the latter, because it is not
so clear from this what the result will be, and if the one has been
secured, the other has been secured also. Again, one should put last
the point which one most wishes to have conceded; for people are specially
inclined to deny the first questions put to them, because most people
in asking questions put first the points which they are most eager
to secure. On the other hand, in dealing with some people propositions
of this sort should be put forward first: for ill-tempered men admit
most readily what comes first, unless the conclusion that will result
actually stares them in the face, while at the close of an argument
they show their ill-temper. Likewise also with those who consider
themselves smart at answering: for when they have admitted most of
what you want they finally talk clap-trap to the effect that the conclusion
does not follow from their admissions: yet they say 'Yes' readily,
confident in their own character, and imagining that they cannot suffer
any reverse. Moreover, it is well to expand the argument and insert
things that it does not require at all, as do those who draw false
geometrical figures: for in the multitude of details the whereabouts
of the fallacy is obscured. For this reason also a questioner sometimes
evades observation as he adds in a corner what, if he formulated it
by itself, would not be granted. 

For concealment, then, the rules which should be followed are the
above. Ornament is attained by induction and distinction of things
closely akin. What sort of process induction is obvious: as for distinction,
an instance of the kind of thing meant is the distinction of one form
of knowledge as better than another by being either more accurate,
or concerned with better objects; or the distinction of sciences into
speculative, practical, and productive. For everything of this kind
lends additional ornament to the argument, though there is no necessity
to say them, so far as the conclusion goes. 

For clearness, examples and comparisons should be adduced, and let
the illustrations be relevant and drawn from things that we know,
as in Homer and not as in Choerilus; for then the proposition is likely
to become clearer. 

Part 2

In dialectics, syllogism should be employed in reasoning against dialecticians
rather than against the crowd: induction, on the other hand, is most
useful against the crowd. This point has been treated previously as
well.' In induction, it is possible in some cases to ask the question
in its universal form, but in others this is not easy, because there
is no established general term that covers all the resemblances: in
this case, when people need to secure the universal, they use the
phrase 'in all cases of this sort'. But it is one of the very hardest
things to distinguish which of the things adduced are 'of this sort',
and which are not: and in this connexion people often throw dust in
each others' eyes in their discussion, the one party asserting the
likeness of things that are not alike, and the other disputing the
likeness of things that are. One ought, therefore, to try oneself
to coin a word to cover all things of the given sort, so as to leave
no opportunity either to the answerer to dispute, and say that the
thing advanced does not answer to a like description, or to the questioner
to suggest falsely that it does answer to a like description, for
many things appear to answer to like descriptions that do not really
do so. 

If one has made an induction on the strength of several cases and
yet the answerer refuses to grant the universal proposition, then
it is fair to demand his objection. But until one has oneself stated
in what cases it is so, it is not fair to demand that he shall say
in what cases it is not so: for one should make the induction first,
and then demand the objection. One ought, moreover, to claim that
the objections should not be brought in reference to the actual subject
of the proposition, unless that subject happen to be the one and only
thing of the kind, as for instance two is the one prime number among
the even numbers: for, unless he can say that this subject is unique
of its kind, the objector ought to make his objection in regard to
some other. People sometimes object to a universal proposition, and
bring their objection not in regard to the thing itself, but in regard
to some homonym of it: thus they argue that a man can very well have
a colour or a foot or a hand other than his own, for a painter may
have a colour that is not his own, and a cook may have a foot that
is not his own. To meet them, therefore, you should draw the distinction
before putting your question in such cases: for so long as the ambiguity
remains undetected, so long will the objection to the proposition
be deemed valid. If, however, he checks the series of questions by
an objection in regard not to some homonym, but to the actual thing
asserted, the questioner should withdraw the point objected to, and
form the remainder into a universal proposition, until he secures
what he requires; e.g. in the case of forgetfulness and having forgotten:
for people refuse to admit that the man who has lost his knowledge
of a thing has forgotten it, because if the thing alters, he has lost
knowledge of it, but he has not forgotten it. Accordingly the thing
to do is to withdraw the part objected to, and assert the remainder,
e.g. that if a person have lost knowledge of a thing while it still
remains, he then has forgotten it. One should similarly treat those
who object to the statement that 'the greater the good, the greater
the evil that is its opposite': for they allege that health, which
is a less good thing than vigour, has a greater evil as its opposite:
for disease is a greater evil than debility. In this case too, therefore,
we have to withdraw the point objected to; for when it has been withdrawn,
the man is more likely to admit the proposition, e.g. that 'the greater
good has the greater evil as its opposite, unless the one good involves
the other as well', as vigour involves health. This should be done
not only when he formulates an objection, but also if, without so
doing, he refuses to admit the point because he foresees something
of the kind: for if the point objected to be withdrawn, he will be
forced to admit the proposition because he cannot foresee in the rest
of it any case where it does not hold true: if he refuse to admit
it, then when asked for an objection he certainly will be unable to
render one. Propositions that are partly false and partly true are
of this type: for in the case of these it is possible by withdrawing
a part to leave the rest true. If, however, you formulate the proposition
on the strength of many cases and he has no objection to bring, you
may claim that he shall admit it: for a premiss is valid in dialectics
which thus holds in several instances and to which no objection is
forthcoming. 

Whenever it is possible to reason to the same conclusion either through
or without a reduction per impossibile, if one is demonstrating and
not arguing dialectically it makes no difference which method of reasoning
be adopted, but in argument with another reasoning per impossibile
should be avoided. For where one has reasoned without the reduction
per impossibile, no dispute can arise; if, on the other hand, one
does reason to an impossible conclusion, unless its falsehood is too
plainly manifest, people deny that it is impossible, so that the questioners
do not get what they want. 

One should put forward all propositions that hold true of several
cases, and to which either no objection whatever appears or at least
not any on the surface: for when people cannot see any case in which
it is not so, they admit it for true. 

The conclusion should not be put in the form of a question; if it
be, and the man shakes his head, it looks as if the reasoning had
failed. For often, even if it be not put as a question but advanced
as a consequence, people deny it, and then those who do not see that
it follows upon the previous admissions do not realize that those
who deny it have been refuted: when, then, the one man merely asks
it as a question without even saying that it so follows, and the other
denies it, it looks altogether as if the reasoning had failed.

Not every universal question can form a dialectical proposition as
ordinarily understood, e.g. 'What is man?' or 'How many meanings has
"the good"?' For a dialectical premiss must be of a form to which
it is possible to reply 'Yes' or 'No', whereas to the aforesaid it
is not possible. For this reason questions of this kind are not dialectical
unless the questioner himself draws distinctions or divisions before
expressing them, e.g. 'Good means this, or this, does it not?' For
questions of this sort are easily answered by a Yes or a No. Hence
one should endeavour to formulate propositions of this kind in this
form. It is at the same time also perhaps fair to ask the other man
how many meanings of 'the good' there are, whenever you have yourself
distinguished and formulated them, and he will not admit them at all.

Any one who keeps on asking one thing for a long time is a bad inquirer.
For if he does so though the person questioned keeps on answering
the questions, clearly he asks a large number of questions, or else
asks the same question a large number of times: in the one case he
merely babbles, in the other he fails to reason: for reasoning always
consists of a small number of premisses. If, on the other hand, he
does it because the person questioned does not answer the questions,
he is at fault in not taking him to task or breaking off the discussion.

Part 3

There are certain hypotheses upon which it is at once difficult to
bring, and easy to stand up to, an argument. Such (e.g.) are those
things which stand first and those which stand last in the order of
nature. For the former require definition, while the latter have to
be arrived at through many steps if one wishes to secure a continuous
proof from first principles, or else all discussion about them wears
the air of mere sophistry: for to prove anything is impossible unless
one begins with the appropriate principles, and connects inference
with inference till the last are reached. Now to define first principles
is just what answerers do not care to do, nor do they pay any attention
if the questioner makes a definition: and yet until it is clear what
it is that is proposed, it is not easy to discuss it. This sort of
thing happens particularly in the case of the first principles: for
while the other propositions are shown through these, these cannot
be shown through anything else: we are obliged to understand every
item of that sort by a definition. The inferences, too, that lie too
close to the first principle are hard to treat in argument: for it
is not possible to bring many arguments in regard to them, because
of the small number of those steps, between the conclusion and the
principle, whereby the succeeding propositions have to be shown. The
hardest, however, of all definitions to treat in argument are those
that employ terms about which, in the first place, it is uncertain
whether they are used in one sense or several, and, further, whether
they are used literally or metaphorically by the definer. For because
of their obscurity, it is impossible to argue upon such terms; and
because of the impossibility of saying whether this obscurity is due
to their being used metaphorically, it is impossible to refute them.

In general, it is safe to suppose that, whenever any problem proves
intractable, it either needs definition or else bears either several
senses, or a metaphorical sense, or it is not far removed from the
first principles; or else the reason is that we have yet to discover
in the first place just this-in which of the aforesaid directions
the source of our difficulty lies: when we have made this clear, then
obviously our business must be either to define or to distinguish,
or to supply the intermediate premisses: for it is through these that
the final conclusions are shown. 

It often happens that a difficulty is found in discussing or arguing
a given position because the definition has not been correctly rendered:
e.g. 'Has one thing one contrary or many?': here when the term 'contraries'
has been properly defined, it is easy to bring people to see whether
it is possible for the same thing to have several contraries or not:
in the same way also with other terms requiring definition. It appears
also in mathematics that the difficulty in using a figure is sometimes
due to a defect in definition; e.g. in proving that the line which
cuts the plane parallel to one side divides similarly both the line
which it cuts and the area; whereas if the definition be given, the
fact asserted becomes immediately clear: for the areas have the same
fraction subtracted from them as have the sides: and this is the definition
of 'the same ratio'. The most primary of the elementary principles
are without exception very easy to show, if the definitions involved,
e.g. the nature of a line or of a circle, be laid down; only the arguments
that can be brought in regard to each of them are not many, because
there are not many intermediate steps. If, on the other hand, the
definition of the starting-points be not laid down, to show them is
difficult and may even prove quite impossible. The case of the significance
of verbal expressions is like that of these mathematical conceptions.

One may be sure then, whenever a position is hard to discuss, that
one or other of the aforesaid things has happened to it. Whenever,
on the other hand, it is a harder task to argue to the point claimed,
i.e. the premiss, than to the resulting position, a doubt may arise
whether such claims should be admitted or not: for if a man is going
to refuse to admit it and claim that you shall argue to it as well,
he will be giving the signal for a harder undertaking than was originally
proposed: if, on the other hand, he grants it, he will be giving the
original thesis credence on the strength of what is less credible
than itself. If, then, it is essential not to enhance the difficulty
of the problem, he had better grant it; if, on the other hand, it
be essential to reason through premisses that are better assured,
he had better refuse. In other words, in serious inquiry he ought
not to grant it, unless he be more sure about it than about the conclusion;
whereas in a dialectical exercise he may do so if he is merely satisfied
of its truth. Clearly, then, the circumstances under which such admissions
should be claimed are different for a mere questioner and for a serious
teacher. 

Part 4

As to the formulation, then, and arrangement of one's questions, about
enough has been said. 

With regard to the giving of answers, we must first define what is
the business of a good answerer, as of a good questioner. The business
of the questioner is so to develop the argument as to make the answerer
utter the most extrvagant paradoxes that necessarily follow because
of his position: while that of the answerer is to make it appear that
it is not he who is responsible for the absurdity or paradox, but
only his position: for one may, perhaps, distinguish between the mistake
of taking up a wrong position to start with, and that of not maintaining
it properly, when once taken up. 

Part 5

Inasmuch as no rules are laid down for those who argue for the sake
of training and of examination:-and the aim of those engaged in teaching
or learning is quite different from that of those engaged in a competition;
as is the latter from that of those who discuss things together in
the spirit of inquiry: for a learner should always state what he thinks:
for no one is even trying to teach him what is false; whereas in a
competition the business of the questioner is to appear by all means
to produce an effect upon the other, while that of the answerer is
to appear unaffected by him; on the other hand, in an assembly of
disputants discussing in the spirit not of a competition but of an
examination and inquiry, there are as yet no articulate rules about
what the answerer should aim at, and what kind of things he should
and should not grant for the correct or incorrect defence of his position:-inasmuch,
then, as we have no tradition bequeathed to us by others, let us try
to say something upon the matter for ourselves. 

The thesis laid down by the answerer before facing the questioner's
argument is bound of necessity to be one that is either generally
accepted or generally rejected or else is neither: and moreover is
so accepted or rejected either absolutely or else with a restriction,
e.g. by some given person, by the speaker or by some one else. The
manner, however, of its acceptance or rejection, whatever it be, makes
no difference: for the right way to answer, i.e. to admit or to refuse
to admit what has been asked, will be the same in either case. If,
then, the statement laid down by the answerer be generally rejected,
the conclusion aimed at by the questioner is bound to be one generally
accepted, whereas if the former be generally accepted, the latter
is generally rejected: for the conclusion which the questioner tries
to draw is always the opposite of the statement laid down. If, on
the other hand, what is laid down is generally neither rejected nor
accepted, the conclusion will be of the same type as well. Now since
a man who reasons correctly demonstrates his proposed conclusion from
premisses that are more generally accepted, and more familiar, it
is clear that (1) where the view laid down by him is one that generally
is absolutely rejected, the answerer ought not to grant either what
is thus absolutely not accepted at all, or what is accepted indeed,
but accepted less generally than the questioner's conclusion. For
if the statement laid down by the answerer be generally rejected,
the conclusion aimed at by the questioner will be one that is generally
accepted, so that the premisses secured by the questioner should all
be views generally accepted, and more generally accepted than his
proposed conclusion, if the less familiar is to be inferred through
the more familiar. Consequently, if any of the questions put to him
be not of this character, the answerer should not grant them. (2)
If, on the other hand, the statement laid down by the answerer be
generally accepted without qualification, clearly the conclusion sought
by the questioner will be one generally rejected without qualification.
Accordingly, the answerer should admit all views that are generally
accepted and, of those that are not generally accepted, all that are
less generally rejected than the conclusion sought by the questioner.
For then he will probably be thought to have argued sufficiently well.
(3) Likewise, too, if the statement laid down by the answerer be neither
rejected generally nor generally accepted; for then, too, anything
that appears to be true should be granted, and, of the views not generally
accepted, any that are more generally accepted than the questioner's
conclusion; for in that case the result will be that the arguments
will be more generally accepted. If, then, the view laid down by the
answerer be one that is generally accepted or rejected without qualification,
then the views that are accepted absolutely must be taken as the standard
of comparison: whereas if the view laid down be one that is not generally
accepted or rejected, but only by the answerer, then the standard
whereby the latter must judge what is generally accepted or not, and
must grant or refuse to grant the point asked, is himself. If, again,
the answerer be defending some one else's opinion, then clearly it
will be the latter's judgement to which he must have regard in granting
or denying the various points. This is why those, too, who introduce
other's opinions, e.g. that 'good and evil are the same thing, as
Heraclitus says,' refuse to admit the impossibility of contraries
belonging at the same time to the same thing; not because they do
not themselves believe this, but because on Heraclitus' principles
one has to say so. The same thing is done also by those who take on
the defence of one another's positions; their aim being to speak as
would the man who stated the position. 

Part 6

It is clear, then, what the aims of the answerer should be, whether
the position he lays down be a view generally accepted without qualification
or accepted by some definite person. Now every question asked is bound
to involve some view that is either generally held or generally rejected
or neither, and is also bound to be either relevant to the argument
or irrelevant: if then it be a view generally accepted and irrelevant,
the answerer should grant it and remark that it is the accepted view:
if it be a view not generally accepted and irrelevant, he should grant
it but add a comment that it is not generally accepted, in order to
avoid the appearance of being a simpleton. If it be relevant and also
be generally accepted, he should admit that it is the view generally
accepted but say that it lies too close to the original proposition,
and that if it be granted the problem proposed collapses. If what
is claimed by the questioner be relevant but too generally rejected,
the answerer, while admitting that if it be granted the conclusion
sought follows, should yet protest that the proposition is too absurd
to be admitted. Suppose, again, it be a view that is neither rejected
generally nor generally accepted, then, if it be irrelevant to the
argument, it may be granted without restriction; if, however, it be
relevant, the answerer should add the comment that, if it be granted,
the original problem collapses. For then the answerer will not be
held to be personally accountable for what happens to him, if he grants
the several points with his eyes open, and also the questioner will
be able to draw his inference, seeing that all the premisses that
are more generally accepted than the conclusion are granted him. Those
who try to draw an inference from premisses more generally rejected
than the conclusion clearly do not reason correctly: hence, when men
ask these things, they ought not to be granted. 

Part 7

The questioner should be met in a like manner also in the case of
terms used obscurely, i.e. in several senses. For the answerer, if
he does not understand, is always permitted to say 'I do not understand':
he is not compelled to reply 'Yes' or 'No' to a question which may
mean different things. Clearly, then, in the first place, if what
is said be not clear, he ought not to hesitate to say that he does
not understand it; for often people encounter some difficulty from
assenting to questions that are not clearly put. If he understands
the question and yet it covers many senses, then supposing what it
says to be universally true or false, he should give it an unqualified
assent or denial: if, on the other hand, it be partly true and partly
false, he should add a comment that it bears different senses, and
also that in one it is true, in the other false: for if he leave this
distinction till later, it becomes uncertain whether originally as
well he perceived the ambiguity or not. If he does not foresee the
ambiguity, but assents to the question having in view the one sense
of the words, then, if the questioner takes it in the other sense,
he should say, 'That was not what I had in view when I admitted it;
I meant the other sense': for if a term or expression covers more
than one thing, it is easy to disagree. If, however, the question
is both clear and simple, he should answer either 'Yes' or 'No'.

Part 8

A premiss in reasoning always either is one of the constituent elements
in the reasoning, or else goes to establish one of these: (and you
can always tell when it is secured in order to establish something
else by the fact of a number of similar questions being put: for as
a rule people secure their universal by means either of induction
or of likeness):-accordingly the particular propositions should all
be admitted, if they are true and generally held. On the other hand,
against the universal one should try to bring some negative instance;
for to bring the argument to a standstill without a negative instance,
either real or apparent, shows ill-temper. If, then, a man refuses
to grant the universal when supported by many instances, although
he has no negative instance to show, he obviously shows ill-temper.
If, moreover, he cannot even attempt a counter-proof that it is not
true, far more likely is he to be thought ill-tempered-although even
counter-proof is not enough: for we often hear arguments that are
contrary to common opinions, whose solution is yet difficult, e.g.
the argument of Zeno that it is impossible to move or to traverse
the stadium;-but still, this is no reason for omitting to assert the
opposites of these views. If, then, a man refuses to admit the proposition
without having either a negative instance or some counter-argument
to bring against it, clearly he is ill-tempered: for ill-temper in
argument consists in answering in ways other than the above, so as
to wreck the reasoning. 

Part 9

Before maintaining either a thesis or a definition the answerer should
try his hand at attacking it by himself; for clearly his business
is to oppose those positions from which questioners demolish what
he has laid down. 

He should beware of maintaining a hypothesis that is generally rejected:
and this it may be in two ways: for it may be one which results in
absurd statements, e.g. suppose any one were to say that everything
is in motion or that nothing is; and also there are all those which
only a bad character would choose, and which are implicitly opposed
to men's wishes, e.g. that pleasure is the good, and that to do injustice
is better than to suffer it. For people then hate him, supposing him
to maintain them not for the sake of argument but because he really
thinks them. 

Part 10

Of all arguments that reason to a false conclusion the right solution
is to demolish the point on which the fallacy that occurs depends:
for the demolition of any random point is no solution, even though
the point demolished be false. For the argument may contain many falsehoods,
e.g. suppose some one to secure the premisses, 'He who sits, writes'
and 'Socrates is sitting': for from these it follows that 'Socrates
is writing'. Now we may demolish the proposition 'Socrates is sitting',
and still be no nearer a solution of the argument; it may be true
that the point claimed is false; but it is not on that that fallacy
of the argument depends: for supposing that any one should happen
to be sitting and not writing, it would be impossible in such a case
to apply the same solution. Accordingly, it is not this that needs
to be demolished, but rather that 'He who sits, writes': for he who
sits does not always write. He, then, who has demolished the point
on which the fallacy depends, has given the solution of the argument
completely. Any one who knows that it is on such and such a point
that the argument depends, knows the solution of it, just as in the
case of a figure falsely drawn. For it is not enough to object, even
if the point demolished be a falsehood, but the reason of the fallacy
should also be proved: for then it would be clear whether the man
makes his objection with his eyes open or not. 

There are four possible ways of preventing a man from working his
argument to a conclusion. It can be done either by demolishing the
point on which the falsehood that comes about depends, or by stating
an objection directed against the questioner: for often when a solution
has not as a matter of fact been brought, yet the questioner is rendered
thereby unable to pursue the argument any farther. Thirdly, one may
object to the questions asked: for it may happen that what the questioner
wants does not follow from the questions he has asked because he has
asked them badly, whereas if something additional be granted the conclusion
comes about. If, then, the questioner be unable to pursue his argument
farther, the objection would properly be directed against the questioner;
if he can do so, then it would be against his questions. The fourth
and worst kind of objection is that which is directed to the time
allowed for discussion: for some people bring objections of a kind
which would take longer to answer than the length of the discussion
in hand. 

There are then, as we said, four ways of making objections: but of
them the first alone is a solution: the others are just hindrances
and stumbling-blocks to prevent the conclusions. 

Part 11

Adverse criticism of an argument on its own merits, and of it when
presented in the form of questions, are two different things. For
often the failure to carry through the argument correctly in discussion
is due to the person questioned, because he will not grant the steps
of which a correct argument might have been made against his position:
for it is not in the power of the one side only to effect properly
a result that depends on both alike. Accordingly it sometimes becomes
necessary to attack the speaker and not his position, when the answerer
lies in wait for the points that are contrary to the questioner and
becomes abusive as well: when people lose their tempers in this way,
their argument becomes a contest, not a discussion. Moreover, since
arguments of this kind are held not for the sake of instruction but
for purposes of practice and examination, clearly one has to reason
not only to true conclusions, but also to false ones, and not always
through true premisses, but sometimes through false as well. For often,
when a true proposition is put forward, the dialectician is compelled
to demolish it: and then false propositions have to be formulated.
Sometimes also when a false proposition is put forward, it has to
be demolished by means of false propositions: for it is possible for
a given man to believe what is not the fact more firmly than the truth.
Accordingly, if the argument be made to depend on something that he
holds, it will be easier to persuade or help him. He, however, who
would rightly convert any one to a different opinion should do so
in a dialectical and not in a contentious manner, just as a geometrician
should reason geometrically, whether his conclusion be false or true:
what kind of syllogisms are dialectical has already been said. The
principle that a man who hinders the common business is a bad partner,
clearly applies to an argument as well; for in arguments as well there
is a common aim in view, except with mere contestants, for these cannot
both reach the same goal; for more than one cannot possibly win. It
makes no difference whether he effects this as answerer or as questioner:
for both he who asks contentious questions is a bad dialectician,
and also he who in answering fails to grant the obvious answer or
to understand the point of the questioner's inquiry. What has been
said, then, makes it clear that adverse criticism is not to be passed
in a like strain upon the argument on its own merits, and upon the
questioner: for it may very well be that the argument is bad, but
that the questioner has argued with the answerer in the best possible
way: for when men lose their tempers, it may perhaps be impossible
to make one's inferences straight-forwardly as one would wish: we
have to do as we can. 

Inasmuch as it is indeterminate when people are claiming the admission
of contrary things, and when they are claiming what originally they
set out to prove-for often when they are talking by themselves they
say contrary things, and admit afterwards what they have previously
denied; for which reason they often assent, when questioned, to contrary
things and to what originally had to be proved-the argument is sure
to become vitiated. The responsibility, however, for this rests with
the answerer, because while refusing to grant other points, he does
grant points of that kind. It is, then, clear that adverse criticism
is not to be passed in a like manner upon questioners and upon their
arguments. 

In itself an argument is liable to five kinds of adverse criticism:

(1) The first is when neither the proposed conclusion nor indeed any
conclusion at all is drawn from the questions asked, and when most,
if not all, of the premisses on which the conclusion rests are false
or generally rejected, when, moreover, neither any withdrawals nor
additions nor both together can bring the conclusions about.

(2) The second is, supposing the reasoning, though constructed from
the premisses, and in the manner, described above, were to be irrelevant
to the original position. 

(3) The third is, supposing certain additions would bring an inference
about but yet these additions were to be weaker than those that were
put as questions and less generally held than the conclusion.

(4) Again, supposing certain withdrawals could effect the same: for
sometimes people secure more premisses than are necessary, so that
it is not through them that the inference comes about. 

(5) Moreover, suppose the premisses be less generally held and less
credible than the conclusion, or if, though true, they require more
trouble to prove than the proposed view. 

One must not claim that the reasoning to a proposed view shall in
every case equally be a view generally accepted and convincing: for
it is a direct result of the nature of things that some subjects of
inquiry shall be easier and some harder, so that if a man brings people
to accept his point from opinions that are as generally received as
the case admits, he has argued his case correctly. Clearly, then,
not even the argument itself is open to the same adverse criticism
when taken in relation to the proposed conclusion and when taken by
itself. For there is nothing to prevent the argument being open to
reproach in itself, and yet commendable in relation to the proposed
conclusion, or again, vice versa, being commendable in itself, and
yet open to reproach in relation to the proposed conclusion, whenever
there are many propositions both generally held and also true whereby
it could easily be proved. It is possible also that an argument, even
though brought to a conclusion, may sometimes be worse than one which
is not so concluded, whenever the premisses of the former are silly,
while its conclusion is not so; whereas the latter, though requiring
certain additions, requires only such as are generally held and true,
and moreover does not rest as an argument on these additions. With
those which bring about a true conclusion by means of false premisses,
it is not fair to find fault: for a false conclusion must of necessity
always be reached from a false premiss, but a true conclusion may
sometimes be drawn even from false premisses; as is clear from the
Analytics. 

Whenever by the argument stated something is demonstrated, but that
something is other than what is wanted and has no bearing whatever
on the conclusion, then no inference as to the latter can be drawn
from it: and if there appears to be, it will be a sophism, not a proof.
A philosopheme is a demonstrative inference: an epichireme is a dialectical
inference: a sophism is a contentious inference: an aporeme is an
inference that reasons dialectically to a contradiction.

If something were to be shown from premisses, both of which are views
generally accepted, but not accepted with like conviction, it may
very well be that the conclusion shown is something held more strongly
than either. If, on the other hand, general opinion be for the one
and neither for nor against the other, or if it be for the one and
against the other, then, if the pro and con be alike in the case of
the premisses, they will be alike for the conclusion also: if, on
the other hand, the one preponderates, the conclusion too will follow
suit. 

It is also a fault in reasoning when a man shows something through
a long chain of steps, when he might employ fewer steps and those
already included in his argument: suppose him to be showing (e.g.)
that one opinion is more properly so called than another, and suppose
him to make his postulates as follows: 'x-in-itself is more fully
x than anything else': 'there genuinely exists an object of opinion
in itself': therefore 'the object-of-opinion-in-itself is more fully
an object of opinion than the particular objects of opinion'. Now
'a relative term is more fully itself when its correlate is more fully
itself': and 'there exists a genuine opinion-in-itself, which will
be "opinion" in a more accurate sense than the particular opinions':
and it has been postulated both that 'a genuine opinion-in-itself
exists', and that 'x-in-itself is more fully x than anything else':
therefore 'this will be opinion in a more accurate sense'. Wherein
lies the viciousness of the reasoning? Simply in that it conceals
the ground on which the argument depends. 

Part 12

An argument is clear in one, and that the most ordinary, sense, if
it be so brought to a conclusion as to make no further questions necessary:
in another sense, and this is the type most usually advanced, when
the propositions secured are such as compel the conclusion, and the
argument is concluded through premisses that are themselves conclusions:
moreover, it is so also if some step is omitted that generally is
firmly accepted. 

An argument is called fallacious in four senses: (1) when it appears
to be brought to a conclusion, and is not really so-what is called
'contentious' reasoning: (2) when it comes to a conclusion but not
to the conclusion proposed-which happens principally in the case of
reductiones ad impossibile: (3) when it comes to the proposed conclusion
but not according to the mode of inquiry appropriate to the case,
as happens when a non-medical argument is taken to be a medical one,
or one which is not geometrical for a geometrical argument, or one
which is not dialectical for dialectical, whether the result reached
be true or false: (4) if the conclusion be reached through false premisses:
of this type the conclusion is sometimes false, sometimes true: for
while a false conclusion is always the result of false premisses,
a true conclusion may be drawn even from premisses that are not true,
as was said above as well. 

Fallacy in argument is due to a mistake of the arguer rather than
of the argument: yet it is not always the fault of the arguer either,
but only when he is not aware of it: for we often accept on its merits
in preference to many true ones an argument which demolishes some
true proposition if it does so from premisses as far as possible generally
accepted. For an argument of that kind does demonstrate other things
that are true: for one of the premisses laid down ought never to be
there at all, and this will then be demonstrated. If, however, a true
conclusion were to be reached through premisses that are false and
utterly childish, the argument is worse than many arguments that lead
to a false conclusion, though an argument which leads to a false conclusion
may also be of this type. Clearly then the first thing to ask in regard
to the argument in itself is, 'Has it a conclusion?'; the second,
'Is the conclusion true or false?'; the third, 'Of what kind of premisses
does it consist?': for if the latter, though false, be generally accepted,
the argument is dialectical, whereas if, though true, they be generally
rejected, it is bad: if they be both false and also entirely contrary
to general opinion, clearly it is bad, either altogether or else in
relation to the particular matter in hand. 

Part 13

Of the ways in which a questioner may beg the original question and
also beg contraries the true account has been given in the Analytics:'
but an account on the level of general opinion must be given now.

People appear to beg their original question in five ways: the first
and most obvious being if any one begs the actual point requiring
to be shown: this is easily detected when put in so many words; but
it is more apt to escape detection in the case of different terms,
or a term and an expression, that mean the same thing. A second way
occurs whenever any one begs universally something which he has to
demonstrate in a particular case: suppose (e.g.) he were trying to
prove that the knowledge of contraries is one and were to claim that
the knowledge of opposites in general is one: for then he is generally
thought to be begging, along with a number of other things, that which
he ought to have shown by itself. A third way is if any one were to
beg in particular cases what he undertakes to show universally: e.g.
if he undertook to show that the knowledge of contraries is always
one, and begged it of certain pairs of contraries: for he also is
generally considered to be begging independently and by itself what,
together with a number of other things, he ought to have shown. Again,
a man begs the question if he begs his conclusion piecemeal: supposing
e.g. that he had to show that medicine is a science of what leads
to health and to disease, and were to claim first the one, then the
other; or, fifthly, if he were to beg the one or the other of a pair
of statements that necessarily involve one other; e.g. if he had to
show that the diagonal is incommensurable with the side, and were
to beg that the side is incommensurable with the diagonal.

The ways in which people assume contraries are equal in number to
those in which they beg their original question. For it would happen,
firstly, if any one were to beg an opposite affirmation and negation;
secondly, if he were to beg the contrary terms of an antithesis, e.g.
that the same thing is good and evil; thirdly, suppose any one were
to claim something universally and then proceed to beg its contradictory
in some particular case, e.g. if having secured that the knowledge
of contraries is one, he were to claim that the knowledge of what
makes for health or for disease is different; or, fourthly, suppose
him, after postulating the latter view, to try to secure universally
the contradictory statement. Again, fifthly, suppose a man begs the
contrary of the conclusion which necessarily comes about through the
premisses laid down; and this would happen suppose, even without begging
the opposites in so many words, he were to beg two premisses such
that this contradictory statement that is opposite to the first conclusion
will follow from them. The securing of contraries differs from begging
the original question in this way: in the latter case the mistake
lies in regard to the conclusion; for it is by a glance at the conclusion
that we tell that the original question has been begged: whereas contrary
views lie in the premisses, viz. in a certain relation which they
bear to one another. 

Part 14

The best way to secure training and practice in arguments of this
kind is in the first place to get into the habit of converting the
arguments. For in this way we shall be better equipped for dealing
with the proposition stated, and after a few attempts we shall know
several arguments by heart. For by 'conversion' of an argument is
meant the taking the reverse of the conclusion together with the remaining
propositions asked and so demolishing one of those that were conceded:
for it follows necessarily that if the conclusion be untrue, some
one of the premisses is demolished, seeing that, given all the premisses,
the conclusion was bound to follow. Always, in dealing with any proposition,
be on the look-out for a line of argument both pro and con: and on
discovering it at once set about looking for the solution of it: for
in this way you will soon find that you have trained yourself at the
same time in both asking questions and answering them. If we cannot
find any one else to argue with, we should argue with ourselves. Select,
moreover, arguments relating to the same thesis and range them side
by side: for this produces a plentiful supply of arguments for carrying
a point by sheer force, and in refutation also it is of great service,
whenever one is well stocked with arguments pro and con: for then
you find yourself on your guard against contrary statements to the
one you wish to secure. Moreover, as contributing to knowledge and
to philosophic wisdom the power of discerning and holding in one view
the results of either of two hypotheses is no mean instrument; for
it then only remains to make a right choice of one of them. For a
task of this kind a certain natural ability is required: in fact real
natural ability just is the power right to choose the true and shun
the false. Men of natural ability can do this; for by a right liking
or disliking for whatever is proposed to them they rightly select
what is best. 

It is best to know by heart arguments upon those questions which are
of most frequent occurrence, and particularly in regard to those propositions
which are ultimate: for in discussing these answerers frequently give
up in despair. Moreover, get a good stock of definitions: and have
those of familiar and primary ideas at your fingers' ends: for it
is through these that reasonings are effected. You should try, moreover,
to master the heads under which other arguments mostly tend to fall.
For just as in geometry it is useful to be practised in the elements,
and in arithmetic to have the multiplication table up to ten at one's
fingers' ends-and indeed it makes a great difference in one's knowledge
of the multiples of other numbers too-likewise also in arguments it
is a great advantage to be well up in regard to first principles,
and to have a thorough knowledge of premisses at the tip of one's
tongue. For just as in a person with a trained memory, a memory of
things themselves is immediately caused by the mere mention of their
loci, so these habits too will make a man readier in reasoning, because
he has his premisses classified before his mind's eye, each under
its number. It is better to commit to memory a premiss of general
application than an argument: for it is difficult to be even moderately
ready with a first principle, or hypothesis. 

Moreover, you should get into the habit of turning one argument into
several, and conceal your procedure as darkly as you can: this kind
of effect is best produced by keeping as far as possible away from
topics akin to the subject of the argument. This can be done with
arguments that are entirely universal, e.g. the statement that 'there
cannot be one knowledge of more than one thing': for that is the case
with both relative terms and contraries and co-ordinates.

Records of discussions should be made in a universal form, even though
one has argued only some particular case: for this will enable one
to turn a single rule into several. A like rule applies in Rhetoric
as well to enthymemes. For yourself, however, you should as far as
possible avoid universalizing your reasonings. You should, moreover,
always examine arguments to see whether they rest on principles of
general application: for all particular arguments really reason universally,
as well, i.e. a particular demonstration always contains a universal
demonstration, because it is impossible to reason at all without using
universals. 

You should display your training in inductive reasoning against a
young man, in deductive against an expert. You should try, moreover,
to secure from those skilled in deduction their premisses, from inductive
reasoners their parallel cases; for this is the thing in which they
are respectively trained. In general, too, from your exercises in
argumentation you should try to carry away either a syllogism on some
subject or a refutation or a proposition or an objection, or whether
some one put his question properly or improperly (whether it was yourself
or some one else) and the point which made it the one or the other.
For this is what gives one ability, and the whole object of training
is to acquire ability, especially in regard to propositions and objections.
For it is the skilled propounder and objector who is, speaking generally,
a dialectician. To formulate a proposition is to form a number of
things into one-for the conclusion to which the argument leads must
be taken generally, as a single thing-whereas to formulate an objection
is to make one thing into many; for the objector either distinguishes
or demolishes, partly granting, partly denying the statements proposed.

Do not argue with every one, nor practise upon the man in the street:
for there are some people with whom any argument is bound to degenerate.
For against any one who is ready to try all means in order to seem
not to be beaten, it is indeed fair to try all means of bringing about
one's conclusion: but it is not good form. Wherefore the best rule
is, not lightly to engage with casual acquaintances, or bad argument
is sure to result. For you see how in practising together people cannot
refrain from contentious argument. 

It is best also to have ready-made arguments relating to those questions
in which a very small stock will furnish us with arguments serviceable
on a very large number of occasions. These are those that are universal,
and those in regard to which it is rather difficult to produce points
for ourselves from matters of everyday experience. 

THE END
